Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans is a term for Hispanic and Latino Americans having Asian ancestry and for those Hispanics who consider themselves or were officially classified by the United States Census Bureau, Office of Management and Budget, and other U.S. government agencies as Asian Americans.
Hispanicity, which is independent of race, is the only ethnic category, as opposed to racial category, which is officially unified by the U.S. Census Bureau. The distinction made by government agencies for those within the population of any official race category, including "Asian American", is between those who report Hispanic or Latino ethnic backgrounds and all others who do not. In the case of Asian Americans, these two groups are respectively termed Asian Hispanics and non-Hispanic Asian Americans, the former being those who say Asian ancestry from Spanish-speaking Latin America, and the latter consisting of an ethnically diverse collection of all others who are classified as Asian Americans that do not report Hispanic ethnic backgrounds.
Filipino Americans, often have Spanish surnames from the Alphabetical Catalog of Surnames, due to an 1849 decree. While some Filipino Americans consider them Hispanic, the majority do not.


== Population ==
In the 2000 US Census, 119,829 Hispanic or Latino Americans identified as being of Asian race alone.
In 2006 the Census Bureau's American Community Survey estimated them at 154,694, while its Population Estimates, which are official, put them at 277,704.
In the 2010 Census there were 598,146 Asian "Hispanic or Latinos", including those who are multiracial in origin.


== Notable Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans ==
Kirk Acevedo, American actor
Tatyana Ali, American actress and R&B singer
Tyson Beckford, American male model and actor
Steve Caballero, pro skateboarder
Franklin Chang-Díaz, former NASA astronaut
Sonia Chang-Díaz, politician
Alex Cabrera Suzuki, professional baseball player
Chris Cheng, professional marksman
Arthur Chin, United States Air Force pilot
Carlos Galvan, singer
Vanessa Hudgens, actress and singer
Enrique Iglesias, singer
Equipto, rapper
Cassie Ventura, singer, model, and actress
Kelis, singer
Wallace Loh, President of the University of Maryland
Bruno Mars, singer
Chino Moreno, rapper
Asia Nitollano, singer
Sigrid Nunez, writer
Chino Rodriguez, Latin music record executive
Tao Rodríguez-Seeger, musician
Jessica Sanchez, singer
Harry Shum, Jr., actor
Elmelindo Rodrigues Smith, United States Army soldier
Jasmine Villegas, singer


== See also ==

Punjabi Mexican American
Latino
Hispanic
List of Hispanic and Latino Americans
White Hispanic and Latino Americans
Black Hispanic and Latino Americans


== References ==


== External links ==
PBS: A CULTURAL IDENTITY An essay on the meaning of the Hispanic label. By Richard Rodriguez.