Canadian Americans are American citizens or nationals who were born in and/or largely grew up in Canada, but later moved into the United States. It can also be used to refer to American-born citizens who either have parents who immigrated from Canada or have significant Canadian ancestry and/or identity. The term is particularly apt when applied or self-applied to people with strong ties to Canada, such as those who have lived a significant portion of their lives or were educated in Canada, and then relocated to the United States. To others, especially for those living in New England or the Midwest, a Canadian-American is one whose ancestors came from Canada.
The term Canadian refers to some as nationality, and to others as ethnicity. English-speaking Canadian immigrants easily integrate and assimilate into American culture and society as a result of the cultural similarities and in the vocabulary and accent in spoken English. French-speaking Canadians, because of language, culture, and religion, tend to take longer to assimilate. However, by the 3rd generation, the assimilation is complete, and the Canadian identity is more or less folklore. This took place, even though half of the population of the province of Quebec emigrated to the US between 1840 and 1930. Many New England cities formed Little Canadas, but many of these have gradually disappeared.
This cultural "invisibility" within the larger U.S. population is seen as creating stronger affinity amongst Canadians living in the U.S. than might otherwise exist. According to U.S. Census estimates the number of Americans of Canadian ancestry was around 640,000 in 2000. Some sources have cited the number to possibly be over 1,000,000.
Canadians who travel to the U.S. to escape their colder winter are known as "snowbirds". They sometimes have residences in the Southern half of the U.S. (e.g. Florida, the Carolinas, Georgia, Southern Texas, Southern California, and Arizona).


== Americans of Canadian descent ==
Walter Chrysler, automotive industry executive and founder of the Chrysler Corporation
Walt Disney, Animator
Will Durant, Historian and philosopher
Thomas Edison, Inventor
Brendan Fraser, Film and stage actor
Missy Franklin, Olympic gold medal-winning swimmer
Rene Gagnon, U.S. Marine hero
Robert Goulet, Singer and actor
Mike Gravel, Senator from Alaska
Phil Hendrie, Radio personality and comedian
Jimi Hendrix, Musician 
Jack Kerouac, Poet and writer
Grace Metalious, Author
Paul LePage, Governor of Maine
Rudy Vallée, Saxophone player
Mark Wahlberg, Actor


== Canadians who obtained American citizenship ==
Pamela Anderson, actress
Paul Anka, Singer-songwriter and actor
Jim Carrey, Comedian and actor
Dayana Cadeau - Haitian-born Canadian American professional bodybuilder
Marie Dressler, Actress
Brent Fitz, Musician and multi-instrumentalist
David Frum, Speechwriter and journalist
Frank Gehry, Architect
Jennifer Granholm, 47th Governor of Michigan 2003-2011
Bret Hart, Professional Wrestler
Phil Hartman, actor, comedian, screenwriter, and graphic artist.
Chris Irvine, Professional wrestler known as Chris Jericho and Lead-Singer of Fozzy
Peter Jennings, TV journalist/anchor for ABC
Guy Lombardo, Bandleader and violinist
Louis B. Mayer, Film producer
Burt Metcalfe, television and film producer, director, and writer
Alanis Morissette, Singer-songwriter
James Naismith, inventor of basketball
Catherine O'Hara, actress, writer and comedian
Mary Pickford, Actress and film executive
Jason Priestley, Actor and director
Charles Revson, Cosmetics pioneer, founder of Revlon
Jack Scott, Singer and songwriter
Mack Sennett, Film director
William Shatner, actor, musician, singer, author, film director, spokesman and comedian
George Beverly Shea, Gospel music singer-songwriter
Martin Short, Actor, comedian, singer, voice actor
Eric McCormack, Actor, comedian, singer, voice actor
Joe Shuster, Comic book artist, co-creator of Superman
Hank Snow, Country music singer-songwriter
Tara Strong, voice actress for various film and television series.
Daniel Thompson, Inventor of the automatic bagel maker and the folding ping pong table
Jack L. Warner, Film executive


== American cities founded by or named after Canadians ==
Biloxi, founded by Pierre LeMoyne d'Iberville
Bourbonnais named after François Bourbonnais
Dubuque, named after Julien Dubuque
Huron, founded by John Baptiste Flemmond
Juneau, named after Joe Juneau
Milwaukee, founded by Solomon Juneau
Mobile, founded by Pierre LeMoyne d'Iberville
New Orleans, founded by Lemoyne de Bienville
Ontario, founded by George Chaffey
Saint Paul, first settled by Pierre Parrant
Vincennes founded by François-Marie Bissot


== Canadian American Day ==
The Connecticut State Senate in unanimously passed a bill in 2009, making June 24 Canadian American Day in the state of Connecticut. The bill allows state officials to hold ceremonies at the capitol and other places each year to honor Americans of Canadian ancestry. 


== Aboriginal Canadian Americans ==
As a consequence of Article 3 of Jay Treaty of 1794, official First Nations status, or in the US Native American status, also confers the right to live and work on either side of the border.


== Study ==
There are some institutions in the United States that focus on Canadian-American studies such as the Canadian-American Center at the University of Maine, the Center for Canadian American studies at Western Washington University, and the SUNY University at Buffalo Canadian-American Studies Committee


== See also ==

Category:American people of Canadian descent
Canadians of American origin American-Canadians
Canada–United States relations
Franco-Americans
French Canadian
Hyphenated American
Little Canadas
Quebec diaspora


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hamilton, Janice (2006). Canadians in America. Lerner. ISBN 0-8225-2681-6. 
Jeffrey Simpson (2000) Star-Spangled Canadians: Canadians Living the American Dream. HarperCollins ISBN 0-00-255767-3


== External links ==
Connect2Canada.com