CBS News is the news division of American television and radio network CBS. The president of CBS News is David Rhodes. CBS News' broadcasts include the CBS Evening News, CBS This Morning, news magazine programs CBS Sunday Morning, 60 Minutes and 48 Hours, and Sunday morning political affairs program Face the Nation. CBS operates a 24 hour news network called CBSN, the first live anchored 24-hour streaming news network that is exclusively online and on smart devices.


== History ==
In 1929 the Columbia Broadcasting System began making regular radio news broadcasts — five-minute summaries taken from reports from the United Press, one of the three wire services that supplied newspapers with national and international news. In December 1930 CBS chief William S. Paley hired journalist Paul W. White away from United Press as CBS's news editor. Paley put the radio network's news operation at the same level as entertainment, and authorized White to interrupt programming if events warranted. Along with other networks, CBS chafed at the breaking news embargo imposed upon radio by the wire services, which prevented them from using bulletins until they first appeared in print. CBS disregarded an embargo when it broke the story of the Lindbergh kidnapping in 1932, using live on-the-air reporting. Radio networks scooped print outlets with news of the 1932 presidential election.
In March 1933 White was named vice president and general manager in charge of news at CBS. As the first head of CBS News, he began to build an organization that soon established a legendary reputation.
In 1935 White hired Edward R. Murrow, and sent him to London in 1937 to run CBS Radio's European operation. White led a staff that would come to include Charles Collingwood, William L. Shirer, Eric Sevareid, John Charles Daly, Joseph C. Harsch Cecil Brown, Elmer Davis, Quincy Howe, H. V. Kaltenborn and Robert Trout.
"CBS was getting its ducks in a row for the biggest news story in history, World War II", wrote radio historian John Dunning.


=== Television ===
Upon becoming commercial station WCBW (channel 2, now WCBS-TV) in 1941, the pioneer CBS television station in New York City broadcast two daily news programs, at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. weekdays, anchored by Richard Hubbell. Most of the newscasts featured Hubbell reading a script with only occasional cutaways to a map or still photograph. When Pearl Harbor was bombed on December 7, 1941, WCBW (which was usually off the air on Sunday to give the engineers a day off), took to the air at 8:45 p.m. with an extensive special report. The national emergency even broke down the unspoken wall between CBS radio and television. WCBW executives convinced radio announcers and experts such as George Fielding Elliot and Linton Wells to come down to the Grand Central studios during the evening and give information and commentary on the attack. The WCBW special report that night lasted less than 90 minutes. But that special broadcast pushed the limits of live television in 1941 and opened up new possibilities for future broadcasts. As CBS wrote in a special report to the FCC, the unscheduled live news broadcast on December 7 “was unquestionably the most stimulating challenge and marked the greatest advance of any single problem faced up to that time.”
Additional newscasts were scheduled in the early days of the war. In May 1942, WCBW (like almost all television stations) sharply cut back its live program schedule and the newscasts were canceled, since the station temporarily suspended studio operations, resorting exclusively to the occasional broadcast of films. This was primarily because much of the staff had either joined the service or were redeployed to war related technical research, and to prolong the life of the early, unstable cameras which were now impossible to repair due to the wartime lack of parts.

In May 1944, as the war began to turn in favor of the Allies, WCBW reopened the studios and the newscasts returned, briefly anchored by Ned Calmer, and then by Everett Holles. After the war, expanded news programs appeared on the WCBW schedule – whose call letters were changed to WCBS-TV in 1946 – first anchored by Milo Boulton, and later by Douglas Edwards. On May 3, 1948, Edwards began anchoring CBS Television News, a regular 15-minute nightly newscast on the CBS television network, including WCBS-TV. It aired every weeknight at 7:30 p.m., and was the first regularly scheduled, network television news program featuring an anchor (the nightly Lowell Thomas NBC radio network newscast was simulcast on television locally on NBC's WNBT—now WNBC—for a time in the early 1940s and the previously mentioned Richard Hubbell, Ned Calmer, Everett Holles and Milo Boulton on WCBW in the early and mid-1940s, but these were local television broadcasts seen only in New York City). NBC's offering at the time, NBC Television Newsreel (which premiered in February 1948), was simply film footage with voice narration.
In 1950, the name of the nightly newscast was changed to Douglas Edwards with the News, and the following year, it became the first news program to be broadcast on both coasts, thanks to a new coaxial cable connection, prompting Edwards to use the greeting "Good evening everyone, coast to coast." The broadcast was renamed the CBS Evening News when Walter Cronkite replaced Edwards in 1962. Edwards remained with CBS News with various daytime television newscasts and radio news broadcasts until his retirement on April 1, 1988.


== Broadcast history ==
The information on programs listed in this section came directly from CBS News in interviews with the Vice President of Communications and NewsWatch Dallas.
According to the CBS News Library and source Sandy Genelius (Vice President, CBS News Communications), the "CBS Evening News" was the program title for both Saturday and Sunday evening broadcasts. The program title for the Sunday late night news beginning in 1963 was the "CBS Sunday Night News". These titles were also seen on the intro slide of the program's opening.


== Current CBS News broadcasts ==

CBS Overnight News
CBS Morning News
CBS This Morning
CBS This Morning Saturday
CBS News Sunday Morning
Face the Nation
CBS Evening News with Scott Pelley
CBS Evening News (Weekend Editions) * Jim Axelrod Saturday * Jeff Glor Sunday
60 Minutes
48 Hours


=== Prime time/evening news program history ===
West 57th (Meredith Vieira, John Ferrugia) (August 13, 1985–September 9, 1989)
48 Hours (January 19, 1988–present)
60 Minutes II (January 13, 1999–September 2, 2005)
America Tonight (Dan Rather, Charles Kuralt, Lesley Stahl, Robert Krulwich, Edie Magnus) (October 1, 1990–1991)
Street Stories (Ed Bradley; January 9, 1992–June 10, 1993)
Eye to Eye with Connie Chung (June 17, 1993–May 25, 1995)
Public Eye with Bryant Gumbel (October 1, 1997–1998)
CBS Newsbreak
Person to Person


=== Morning news program history ===
Weekdays
CBS Morning News (1963–1979)
The Morning Program (1987)
CBS This Morning (1987–1999; 2012–present)
The Early Show (1999–2012)
Sundays
CBS Sunday Morning (1979–present)


=== Late Night/Early Morning Program History ===
CBS Morning News (1982–present)
CBS Up to the Minute (1992–2015)


== CBSN ==

CBSN is a 24-hour streaming news channel available from the CBS News website and launched on November, 4th 2014. The channel feature live news from 9am to midnight on weekdays. The channel makes all of the resources of CBS News available directly on digital platforms with live, anchored coverage 15 hours each weekday. It is a first for a U.S. 24-hour news channel to forgo cable and be available exclusively only on line and on smart devices such as smart TV's Apple TV, Roku, Amazon Fire and others. The Channel is based at CBS's New York City headquarters.


== CBS Newspath ==
CBS Newspath is CBS News' satellite news-gathering service (similar to CNN Newsource). Newspath provides national hard news, sports highlights, regional spot news, features and live coverage of major breaking news events for affiliate stations to use in their local news broadcasts. The service has a team of domestic and global correspondents and freelance reporters dedicated to reporting for affiliates, and offers several different national or international stories fronted by reporters on a daily basis. CBS Newspath also relies heavily on local affiliates sharing content. Stations will often contribute locally obtained footage that may be of national interest. It replaced a similar service, CBS News NewsNet.
Network News Service (NNS) is a pioneering news organization formed by ABC NewsOne, CBS Newspath and Fox NewsEdge. Launched in June 2000, its subscriber list already includes more than 500 ABC, CBS and Fox affiliates throughout the United States. The three news distributors created NNS to cost-effectively pool resources for developing and delivering second tier news stories and b-roll footage. The goal was to realize cost savings in the creation and distribution of these news images, while news organizations and member television stations continued to independently develop and deliver their own signature coverage of top news stories.


== CBS Radio News ==
The branch of CBS News that produces newscasts and features to radio stations is CBS Radio News, which airs on the CBS Radio Network. The radio network is the oldest unit of CBS and traced its roots to the company's founding in 1927, and the news division took shape over the following 10 years. The list of CBS News correspondents (below) includes those reporting on CBS Radio News.
CBS Radio News produces the oldest daily news show on radio or television, the CBS World News Roundup, which first aired in 1938 and celebrated its 75th anniversary in 2013. The World News Roundup airs twice every weekday: a morning edition is anchored by Steve Kathan and produced by Paul Farry, while a “late edition” is anchored by Bill Whitney and produced by Greg Armstrong. The evening Roundup, previously known as The World Tonight, has aired in its current form since 1956 and has been anchored by Blair Clark, Douglas Edwards, Dallas Townsend and Christopher Glenn (Glenn also anchored the morning Roundup before his death in 2006).
The CBS Radio Network provides newscasts at the top of the hour, regular updates at :31 minutes past the hour, the popular Newsfeeds for affiliates (including WCBS and KYW) at :35 minutes past the hour, and breaking news updates when developments warrant, often at :20 and :50 minutes past the hour. Westwood One handles the distribution.


== Bureaus and offices ==


=== Domestic bureaus ===
Atlanta, Georgia
Chicago, Illinois
Dallas, Texas
Denver, Colorado
Los Angeles, California
Miami, Florida
New York City (Broadcast Headquarters)
San Francisco, California
Washington, D.C.


=== Foreign bureaus ===
Latin America
Havana, Cuba

Europe
Rome, Italy
London, United Kingdom

Middle East
Amman, Jordan
Baghdad, Iraq
Islamabad, Pakistan
Kabul, Afghanistan
Tel Aviv, Israel

Asia
Beijing, China
Tokyo, Japan

Africa
Johannesburg, South Africa


== Personnel ==


=== Current correspondents ===
New York World Headquarters

Washington, D.C.
Rita Braver - CBS Sunday Morning senior correspondent
Margaret Brennan - State Department correspondent
Nancy Cordes - congressional correspondent
Jan Crawford - chief legal correspondent
John Dickerson - political director; anchor, Face the Nation
Major Garrett - chief White House correspondent
Julianna Goldman - correspondent
Lara Logan - correspondent, 60 Minutes and co-anchor, Person to Person
David Martin - national security correspondent
Susan McGinnis - correspondent
Jeff Pegues - Justice and Homeland Security correspondent
Bill Plante - senior White House correspondent
Chip Reid - national correspondent
Susan Spencer - correspondent, 48 Hours and CBS Sunday Morning
Los Angeles
Lee Cowan - national correspondent
Ben Tracy - national correspondent
London
Elizabeth Palmer - correspondent
Denver
Barry Petersen - correspondent
Beijing
Seth Doane - correspondent
Johannesburg
Debora Patta - correspondent
Contributors
Serena Altschul - CBS Sunday Morning correspondent (based in New York)
Anderson Cooper - 60 Minutes correspondent; also as CNN
Nancy Giles - CBS Sunday Morning correspondent (based in New York)
Sanjay Gupta - medical correspondent (based in Atlanta); also as CNN
Steve Hartman - "On The Road" correspondent for the CBS Evening News (based in New York)
Ben Stein - CBS Sunday Morning contributor
CBS Newspath
New York
Alexis Christoforous - business correspondent
Alison Harmelin - CBS News MoneyWatch correspondent
Claire Leka - CBS News MoneyWatch correspondent
CBS Radio News
Howard Arenstein - Washington, D.C. correspondent/bureau manager
Cami McCormick - Washington, D.C. correspondent
Dan Raviv - Washington, D.C. national correspondent
Bill Whitney - New York anchor


=== Past correspondents ===


== Presidents of CBS News ==
Ed Joyce (1983-1986)
Van Gordon Sauter (1986)
David W. Burke (1988–1990)
Eric Ober (1990-1996)
Andrew Heyward (1996-2005)
Sean McManus (2005-2011)
David Rhodes (2011–)


== International broadcasts ==
CBS Evening News is shown on Sky News to viewers in Europe and Africa. In Australia, the CBS Evening News is shown at 11.30 a.m. Monday to Saturday, and at 12.30 p.m. on Sundays on Sky News Australia.
In the Philippines, CBS Evening News (during Katie Couric's era) was broadcast via satellite on QTV 11 (a now-defunct sister station of GMA Network, rebranded to GMA News TV) at 7:30 p.m. with replays at 1:00 p.m. after Balitanghali. CBS Evening News broadcasts were stopped on QTV 11 in late 2010 to make way for a public affairs look-back program (NAPA-Strip and Power Review). 60 Minutes is currently broadcast on CNN Philippines (formerly Talktv, Solar News Channel and 9TV ) as a part of their Stories block, which includes non-CNN documentaries and is broadcast on Wednesday at 8:00 p.m. before CNN Philippines Nightly News with replays in a capacity as a stand-alone program on Saturdays at 8:00 a.m. & 5:00 pm and Sundays at 6:00 a.m, all in local time (UTC + 8).
CBS is not shown outside the Americas on a channel in its own right. However, CBS News programming is shown for a few hours a day on Orbit News in Europe, Africa and the Middle East. CBS News stories are a common occurrence on Australia's Ten News on Network Ten, as part a CBS programming content deal. They also air CBS This Morning each weekday as well.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website