Colombian literature, as an expression of the culture of Colombia, is heterogeneous due to the coexistence of Spanish, African and Native American heritages in an extremely diverse geography. Five distinct historical and cultural traditions can be identified, with their own socioeconomic history: the Caribbean coast, Greater Antioquia, the Cundinamarca-Boyacá Highlands, Greater Tolima and the Western Valley.


== Colonial period (1499-1810) ==
Under the Spanish Empire, major literary topics included conquest narratives, chronicles, religious devotion, and love themes. Some of the best-known authors of this period are:
Hernando Domínguez Camargo (Bogotá, 1606 – Tunja, 1659), Jesuit priest and writer. His work was influenced by the Spanish poet Luis de Góngora, in a cultural trend known as the Indias Baroque. His most recognized works are ”Epic Poem to St Ignacio of Loyola” and “Bouquet of poetic flowers”.
Francisco Álvarez de Velasco y Zorrilla (Bogotá, 1647 – Madrid, 1708). His main work was Rhytmica Sacra, Moral y Laudatiria. His writings show admiration for the work of Francisco de Quevedo and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz.
Francisca Josefa de Castillo y Guevara. Tunjan nun, recognized as one of the most important female authors of mysticism for her Afectos espirituales and her Vida (memoirs).
Juan de Castellanos. Wrote the longest poem ever in the Spanish language, Elegías de Varones Ilustres de Indias.
Juan Rodríguez Freyle. Spanish priest, wrote the extensive chronicle of colonial life El Carnero (The Sheep).


== Emancipation and national consolidation (1780-1830) ==

During the process of independence, Colombian literature was strongly influenced by the political motivations of the moment. The main literary movements were close to Romanticism.
During the nineteenth century, political writing was led by Simón Bolívar. Local journalism was initiated by Antonio Nariño. The Colombian government established the first Academy of Spanish language in the American continent, in 1871.
Other relevant authors were:
Camilo Torres Tenorio
Francisco Antonio Zea.
José Fernández Madrid (February 19, 1789 – June 28, 1830).


== Costumbrismo ==
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the main topic in Colombian literature was the colourful depiction of peasant life, tied to strong criticism of society and government. This type of literature was called costumbrista literature. Some of the authors of this period are:
Tomás Carrasquilla
Adolfo León Gómez
José María Cordovez Moure
Jorge Isaacs
Julio Arboleda
Gregorio Gutiérrez González
Rafael Pombo
Soledad Acosta
Josefa Acevedo de Gomez
Candelario Obeso
Manuel Ancízar


== Modern literature ==

Modernismo and modernism are reactions against the previous literature of Romanticism. Modernism's main topics are ugliness and mystery. The main modern writers are:
Emilia Ayarza
Jose Eustasio Rivera
Rafael Maya
León de Greiff
Luis Vidales
Luis Carlos López
Germán Arciniegas
Porfirio Barba-Jacob
José María Vargas Vila


== Stone and Sky (Piedra y Cielo) ==

The industrialization process in Latin America during the twentieth century generated new literary movements such as the poetic movement named “Piedra y cielo” (1939). Its main authors are:
Eduardo Carranza
Jorge Gaitán Durán
Jorge Rojas
Arturo Camacho Ramírez


== Nothing-ism (Nadaísmo) ==

The violent events in Colombia during the 1940s and 1950s, such as La Violencia and the military government of Gustavo Rojas Pinilla, as well as a considerable urban expansion, influenced in the formation of the Nadaísta (Nothing-ist) movement, which was the Colombian expression of numerous avant-garde-like movements in the poetry of the Americas during the 1950s and 60s (such as the *Beat Generation in the United States and the Tzanticos in Ecuador). Nadaísmo included elements of existentialism and nihilism, a dynamic incorporation of city life, and a generally irreverent, iconoclastic flavor. Authors who were part of this movement include:
Gonzalo Arango
Jotamario Arbeláez
Eduardo Escobar
Fanny Buitrago
Amílcar Osorio
Jaime Jaramillo Escobar
Dukardo Hinestrosa
Kaleigh Mendonca


== The Boom ==

The Latin American Boom was a prolific period for Colombian literature.
Gabriel García Márquez
Eduardo Caballero Calderón
Manuel Mejía Vallejo
Álvaro Mutis
Manuel Zapata Olivella
Andres Caicedo
Alfredo Iriarte
Germán Arciniegas
Álvaro Cepeda Samudio
Nicole Kammerer


== Contemporary authors ==


== Disillusioned Generation / Generación Desencantada ==
This generation groups a broad and ambiguous list of writers, poets who began to publish after the Nadaísmo movement (see above) in the 1970s. Poets like Giovanni Quessep, Harold Alvarado Tenorio, Juan Gustavo Cobo Borda, Elkin Restrepo, José Manuel Arango, Darío Jaramillo Agudelo, Augusto Pinilla, María Mercedes Carranza, and Juan Manuel Roca among many others, have been considered part of this generation, although they have differences in style, themes and ideology.


== Recent generations ==
Some writers like Cristian Valencia, Alberto Salcedo Ramos and Jorge Enrique Botero, have written literary journalism, close to Gonzo style. In fiction there are authors like Hector Abad Faciolince, Santiago Gamboa, Juan Sebastian Cardenas, Nahum Montt, Miguel Mendoza Luna, Sebastian Pineda Buitrago, Mauricio Loza, Ignacio Arroyave Piedrhíta, Antonio Garcia, Mario Mendoza, James Canon, Ricardo Abdahllah, Juan Pablo Plata, Evelio Rosero Diago, Antonio Ungar, Laura Restrepo, Ruben Varona, William Ospina, David Alberto Campos, Oscar Perdomo Gamboa, Juan Esteban Constain, Juan Álvarez, Antonio Iriarte, Esmir Garcés, Antonieta Villamil, Winston Morales, Efraim Medina Reyes, Ricardo Silva Romero and many others.


== Recent poetry ==
In recent decades, in Colombia there has been a significant number of poets of importance, who deal with urban issues and anti-poetry. Among them are Antonieta Villamil, Andrea Cote, Lucia Estrada, Felipe García Quintero, whose poetry has been recognized internationally.


== Narco literature ==
During the early years of the 1990 decade it began to appear in Colombian literature the reality of the drug and political hereditary violence. Titles like The Reader (La Lectora) by Sergio Álvarez and Rosario Tijeras by Jorge Franco and Our Lady of the Assassins (La virgen de los sicarios) by Fernando Vallejo began to portray the new fears and obsessions that the country had acquired at this stage of violence. Cities are the new scene of such violence, after many year of being told as rural case. Recently, there were published works which made a more extensive approach to the issue of drug trafficking and the involvement of it in the lives of Colombians. Works written by Juan Gabriel Vásquez and Sergio Álvarez.


== Poetry ==
Emilia Ayarza
José Asunción Silva
Porfirio Barba-Jacob
Piedad Bonnet
Antonieta Villamil
José Fernández Madrid
Jorge Isaacs
Rafael Pombo
Zacarías Reyán
Julio Flórez


== Children's literature ==
Some of the characters most recognized in Colombian children's literature and the popular imaginary are the stock characters created by Rafael Pombo, which are often found in nursery rhymes, familiar folk tales and in the textbooks for elementary school.

Other important children literature authors are:
Jairo Anibal Niño: with his works "La alegria de querer" (The joy of love), "Razzgo, Indo y Zas", "Catalino Bocachica" among others
Euclides Jaramillo: with the "Tales of Uncle rabbit".
From the 1980s, young adult fiction authors Gloria Cecilia Díaz, Irene Vasco, Evelio José Rosero, Yolanda Reyes and Pilar Lozano introduced new subjects for the genre such as conflict, kidnapping, death and fear. http://web.archive.org/web/http://www.ciudadviva.gov.co/octubre07/magazine/3/index.php Recent picture book voices include the work of Ivar da Coll, Claudia Rueda, Jairo Buitrago and Rafael Yockteng.


== References ==


== See also ==
List of Colombian writers