Simón Bolívar is the image in which Conservatism in Colombia creates its ideologies: the ideals of this great character were used by many years on the different conservative movements. But the first formal party was created at the year of 1837, because of Jose Ignacio de Marquez and the image of Bolivar, it was known as "Republicanos Moderados". There did not exist a program, but they were believers of God, and liked Order and Control. On the year of 1840 there occurred a civil war that helped the perfilation of future parties, including the Colombian Conservative Party movement, principal representative of this ideal.


== Colombian conservatism ==
Colombian conservatism, is an old ideal that believes in protectionism, and other ideals like being against totalitarism. Its history began with the creation of parties that represent conservatism on Colombia. But the strict difference that we may see with this conservatism toward the others, is the attitude it has toward, Protectionism, because many Colombian conservatives consider, it the unique solution for creating a fair market, between poor countries and the ones that are rich.


== Ideals ==
These ideals have change considerably over time, but the most important are
The belief in protectionism.
Belief in family traditions.
Belief in Catholic Church.
Belief in private property.
Belief in Colombia.
Belief in individual rights.
Belief in a social stability.


== Movements ==
There have been many conservative movements, apart from the principal party. We may see "Conservatismo Colombiano" party.
And others like Rojas Pinilla movements that was influenced by conservative ideals, other important movement was created by Nuñez it was a coalition between conservatives and moderated liberals, and it participate at some elections by the name of "Partido Nacional". The National Popular Alliance was initiated in 1960s by disillusioned conservatives and it later developed into a populist opposition party.
Before the creation of the party, the members where called "Godos". This "Republicanos Moderados" and some other "radical conservatives" lead to the beginnings of the Colombian Conservative Party.


== Presidents ==
There have been many conservative presidents:
Simón Bolívar
José Ignacio de Márquez
Pedro Alcántara Herrán
Rufino Cuervo Barreto
Manuel María Mallarino
Mariano Ospina Rodríguez
Bartolomé Calvo
Rafael Núñez (*)
Carlos Holguín Mallarino
Miguel Antonio Caro
Manuel Antonio Sanclemente
José Manuel Marroquín
Rafael Reyes
Ramón González Valencia
Carlos Restrepo
José Vicente Concha
Marco Fidel Suare
Jorge Holguín Mallarino
Pedro Nel Ospina Vásquez
Miguel Avadía Méndez
Mariano Ospina Pérez
Laureano Gómez
Roberto Urdaneta Arbelaez
Guillermo León Valencia
Misael Pastrana Borrero
Belisario Betancur Cuartas
Andrés Pastrana Arango
Álvaro Uribe Vélez(*)
(*)Presidents of Liberal origin which implemented conservative policies / but then become allied with conservatism.


== External link and source ==
http://partidoconservador.org