Debraj Ray (born 3 September 1957) is an Indian-American economist whose focus is development economics and game theory. Ray is currently Julius Silver Professor in the Faculty of Arts and Science, and Professor of Economics at New York University. He is Co-editor of the American Economic Review. 


== Education ==
Ray graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in economics from the University of Calcutta in 1977. He obtained a master's degree (1981) and a PhD (1983) from Cornell University, where his doctoral supervisor was Mukul Majumdar. He wrote his doctoral thesis about intertemporal economics.


== Teaching ==
Ray has held long-term positions at Stanford University, the Indian Statistical Institute, and at Boston University, where he was Director of the Institute for Economic Development. He has held visiting appointments at Harvard University, MIT, the Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the People's University of China in Beijing, and the London School of Economics. He is a Research Affiliate of the Instituto de Análisis Económico in Barcelona.


== Professional affiliations and awards ==
Debraj Ray is a Fellow of the Econometric Society, a Guggenheim Fellow, a recipient of the Mahalanobis Memorial Medal, and a recipient of the Outstanding Young Scientists Award in mathematics from the Indian National Science Academy. He received the Dean's Award for Distinguished Teaching from Stanford University and the Gittner Award for Teaching Excellence in Economics from Boston University. He was awarded a Doctor Philosophiae Honoris Causa from the University of Oslo.
Ray has served on the editorial board of Econometrica, the Journal of Economic Theory, the Journal of Development Economics, the Journal of Economic Growth, the Japanese Economic Review, Games and Economic Behavior, American Economic Journal Microeconomics. He has served as a Foreign Editor of the Review of Economic Studies, and as Co-editor of the Econometric Society journal, Theoretical Economics.


== Books ==
A Game-Theoretic Perspective on Coalition Formation, London: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Contemporary Macroeconomics, edited with A. Bose and A. Sarkar, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Readings in the Theory of Economic Development, edited with D. Mookherjee, London: Blackwell, 2000.
Development Economics, Princeton University Press, 1998. Spanish edition, 2002, Antoni Bosch. Chinese edition 2002, Beijing University Press. Indian edition 1998, Oxford University Press. Dsscription and excerpt, ch. 1.
Game-Theoretical Applications to Economics and Operations Research, edited with B. Dutta, J. Potters, T. Parthasarathy, T. Raghavan, and A. Sen, Theory and Decision Library C, Volume 18, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
Theoretical Issues in Economic Development, edited with B. Dutta, S. Gangopadhyay and D. Mookherjee, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Game Theory and Economic Applications: Proceedings, edited with B. Dutta, D. Mookherjee, T. Parthasarathy, T. Raghavan, S. Tijs, Springer Verlag, 1992.
Economic Theory and Policy: Essays in Honour of Dipak Banerji, edited with B. Dutta, S. Gangopadhyay and D. Mookherjee, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1990.


== Notes ==
^ Information for this entry has been compiled from Ray's webpage, Ray's cv available on his webpage, as well as a short biography in his recent book, A Game-Theoretic Perspective on Coalition Formation (2007; Oxford University Press).
^ http://www.arts.cornell.edu/econ/majumdar/cv.htm


== External links ==
Debraj Ray's homepage at New York University