Feature in archaeology and especially excavation has several different but allied meanings. A feature is a collection of one or more contexts representing some human non-portable activity that generally has a vertical characteristic to it in relation to site stratigraphy. Examples of features are pits, walls, and ditches. General horizontal elements in the stratigraphic sequence, such as layers, dumps, or surfaces are not referred to as features. Examples of surfaces include yards, roads, and floors. Features are distinguished from artifacts in that they cannot be separated from their location without changing their form.
Features tend to have an intrusive characteristic or associated cuts. This is not definitive as surfaces can be referred to as features of a building and free standing structures with no construction cut can still be features. Middens (dump deposits) are also referred to as features due to their discrete boundaries. This is seen in comparison to leveling dumps, which stretch out over a substantial portion of a site. The concept of a feature is, to a certain degree, fuzzy, as it will change depending on the scale of excavation.


== Generic feature types ==
Features specific to certain architecture types or eras such as trilithon for the purposes of this article are not considered generic. Generic features are feature types that can come from a broad section in time of the archaeological record if not all of it. Generic types can include:
Cuts
Re-cuts
Pits
Post holes
Stake holes
Construction cuts
Robber trenches
Walls
Foundations
Ditches
Drains
Wells
Cisterns
Hearths
Stairs and steps
Enclosures
Lynchets
Graves
Burials
Middens
Pit-houses
Fire pits


== See also ==
Archaeological context
Excavation
Archaeological field survey
Single context recording
Harris matrix
Archaeological plan
Archaeological association
Relationship (archaeology)
Cut (archaeology)
Archaeological section
Fill (archaeology)


== References ==
The MoLAS archaeological site manual MoLAS, London 1994. ISBN 0-904818-40-3. Rb 128pp. bl/w