Folsom points are a distinct form of chipped stone projectile points associated with the Folsom Tradition of North America. The style of toolmaking was named after Folsom, New Mexico where the first sample was found within the bone structure of a bison in 1927.


== DescriptionEdit ==
The points are bifacially worked and have a symmetrical, leaf-like shape with a concave base and wide, shallow grooves running almost the entire length of the point. The edges are finely worked. The characteristic groove, known as fluting, may have served to aid hafting to a wooden shaft or dart. Use-wear studies have shown that some examples were used as knives as well as projectile points. The fluting required great technical ability to effect, and it took archaeologists many years of experimentation to replicate it.


== Age and cultural affiliationsEdit ==
Folsom points are found widely across North America and are dated to the period between 9500 BCE and 8000 BCE. The discovery of these artifacts in the early 20th century raised questions about when the first humans arrived in North America. The prevailing idea of a time depth of about 3,000 years was clearly mistaken.
In 1932, an even earlier style of projectile point was found, Clovis, dating back to 11,500 BCE. Clovis points have been found in situ in association with mammoth skeletons.
In the Great Plains area, the use of Folsom points was supplanted over time by Plano points of the various Plano cultures.


== See alsoEdit ==
Folsom tradition
Cascade point
Clovis point
Plano point
Eden point
Cumberland point
Levanna projectile point
Jack's Reef pentagonal projectile point
Lamoka projectile point
Susquehanna broad projectile point
Bare Island projectile point
Greene projectile point
The Galileo Seven


== External linksEdit ==
American Museum of Natural History--Folsom Point


== ReferencesEdit ==
Hillerman, Anthony G. (1973). "The Hunt for the Lost American". The Great Taos Bank Robbery and Other Indian Country Affairs. University of New Mexico Press. ISBN 0-8263-0306-4.  republished in The Great Taos Bank Robbery and Other Indian Country Affairs. New York: Harper Paperbacks. May 1997. ISBN 0-06-101173-8. 
Perino, Gregory (1985). Selected preforms, points and knives of the North American Indians, Vol. 1. Hyneck Printing.