Aland is a town in Gulbarga district in the state of Karnataka, India. It is the headquarters of Aland Taluk. Aland was formed in 1952 as a Town Municipal Council. Aland Taluk is well known for being in news for the reasons of Water Crisis. The area is affected by repeated Drought's and has Infertile Land(Saline) leading to low agro-productivity. Majority of population here, lives below poverty line, with low standard of living and hygiene.


== Geography ==
Aland is located at 17.57°N 76.57°E﻿ / 17.57; 76.57. It has an average elevation of 480 metres (1574 feet). The town is spread over an area of 8 km².
Aland Taluk borders Gulbarga Taluk of Gulbarga district to the east, Afzalpur Taluk of Gulbarga district to the south, Basavakalyan Taluk of Bidar district to the north-west. Many efforts have been taken by various Government's to improve the destitute situation of Aland Taluk, but have succeeded extremely less.
It is a dry area, with low rainfall. Most of the population lives in Povery in Aland Taluk. A major number of population has migrated towards cities due to lack scope for water, education, employment. Power shortage is a serious issue in Aland. Aland records the maximum incidents of farmer suicides in North Karnataka's dry zone. Lack of natural resources and education has given birth to serious issues as low industrialization and high unemployment respectively. As a Tehsil, Aland comes in one of the top unproductive tehsils of India in terms of Revenue, Employment, Malnutrition, & lack of Industrial and Agricultural development.
Aland is one of the Taluk in Gulbarga District in Karnataka State. Aland is 38.2 km from its District Main City Gulbarga. It is 612 km from its State Main City Bangalore. 520 km from Mumbai.


== Demographics ==
As of 2011 India census, Aland had a population of 42,371. Males constitute 51.6% of the population and females 38%. Aland has an low literacy rate of 49.4%, lower than the national average of 59.5%; with 55% of the males and 40% of females literate. Inequality of population is a result of high amount of gender inequality. Water Scarcity and Infertile Land are the major hurdles of Aland. .


== References ==
^ Falling Rain Genomics, Inc – Aland
^ The area of major towns in Karnataka has been mentioned in the webpage Population of Corporation/CMC/TMC/TP belonging to the Municipal Administration Department of the Government of Karnataka
^ "Census of India 2001: Data from the 2001 Census, including cities, villages and towns (Provisional)". Census Commission of India. Archived from the original on 2004-06-16. Retrieved 2008-11-01.