Khlong Toei (also Klong Toey, Thai: คลองเตย; IPA: [kʰlɔ̄ːŋ tɤ̄ːj]) is a district in central Bangkok, long known for its slum. It is bordered by the Chao Phraya River and contains major port facilities. It is also the location of a major market, though not one of tourist importance.
Neighboring districts are (clockwise from the north): Watthana, Phra Khanong, Amphoe Phra Pradaeng of Samut Prakan Province (across the Chao Phraya), Yan Nawa, Sathon, and Pathum Wan.


== History ==

The district was once part of Phra Khanong, but on 9 November 1989 it was separated into a new district. Originally Khlong Toei consisted of 6 sub-districts, three of which have since left to form the new Watthana district (announced on 14 October 1997, effective from 6 March 1998).
The area has a history dating back to the ninth century as a port to cities upstream along the Chao Phraya River, such as Pak Nam Phra Pradaeng (Thai: เมืองปากน้ำพระประแดง) (as opposed to the current Amphoe Phra Pradaeng) built during the King Phutthayotfa Chulalok period. Khlong Thanon Trong (Thai: คลองถนนตรง) was a khlong (canal) and a parallel road built by King Mongkut around 1857. Later, it became known as Khlong Toei and Khlong Hua Lamphong for different sections of the canal. Khlong Toei means the canal of pandan, as the plant grew along the southern bank of the canal. The road was renamed to Rama IV Road by King Vajiravudh in 1919. In 1947, a large portion of Khlong Toei canal was filled up to expand the Rama IV Road surface.


== Administration ==

The district is sub-divided into three sub-districts (Khwaeng). From west to east, these are:
Khlong Toei is a both the name of a subdistrict and the district in which it lies. Phra Khanong is both a subdistrict of Khlong Toei and a district on its own, with only subdistrict Bang Chak. Furthermore, all three subdistricts listed above have counterparts with the addition of "nuea" (north) in Watthana district.


== Port ==
The Khlong Toei Port, also known as Bangkok Port, was Thailand's only major port for sea transportation of cargo. The construction began in 1938 and finished after the end of World War II. The port is on the Chao Phraya River, not far from the Gulf of Thailand. Due to its limited capacity and traffic problems caused by semi-trailer trucks, much of its shipping operation has moved to Laem Chabang Port in Chonburi Province since it was opened in July 1981.


== Places ==

Attractions include:
Bangkok Planetarium
Science Centre for Education
Tamnak Plai Noen, the historic residence of Prince Naris, now converted into a small museum.
Stock Exchange of Thailand Building
The Emporium, a luxury shopping center.
Nana Plaza, a major center for prostitution with go-go and hostess bars.
Queen Sirikit National Convention Center, served by the Bangkok Metro station of the same name, hosts various exhibitions around the year.
Benjakitti Park, a public park next to the convention center. It includes a big lake and is on land that was formerly occupied by the Tobacco Monopoly, the government's tobacco factory.
Benjasiri Park, a public park created to commemorate Her Majesty Queen Sirikit's 60th birthday. It is next to The Emporium.
Chuvit Garden, a public park in the district created by massage parlor tycoon-turned-politician Chuwit Kamolvisit from his own plot of land, about 2,400 m² in size and worth about 1,250 million Baht. Opened in December 2005, it is located on Sukhumvit Soi 10.
Khlong Toei Market, Bangkok's largest wet market.
PAT Stadium located off Sunthon Kosa Road.
Port Authority of Thailand
Eastern Bus Terminal (Ekkamai)
Thailand Tobacco Monopoly
The following places of interest was formerly located in Khlong Toei District:
Lumpinee Boxing Stadium, an indoor Muay Thai arena, now moved to a new location.
Suan Lum Night Bazaar, closed due to contract expiry, now moved to Suan Lum Night Bazaar Ratchadaphisek.


== Transportation ==
Bangkok Skytrain (BTS) stations in the district are Nana, Asok (with interchange to Bangkok Metro Sukhumvit station), Phrom Phong, Thong Lo, Ekkamai, Phra Khanong, and On Nut, all along Sukhumvit Road on the BTS Sukhumvit Line.
Bangkok Metro (MRTA) has stations Khlong Toei, Queen Sirikit National Convention Center and Sukhumvit (interchange to BTS).
Eastern Bus Terminal (also called Ekkamai Bus Terminal) has inter-city buses to destinations such as Pattaya, Rayong and Trat. It is located on Sukhumvit Road, near the Ekkamai BTS station.


== Education ==
The Sacred Heart Convent School is in Khlong Toei District.


== References ==


== External links ==

BMA website with the tourist landmarks of Khlong Toei
Khlong Toei district office (Thai only)
History of Khlong Toei port