The Republic of New Granada was a centralist republic consisting primarily of present-day Colombia and Panama with smaller portions of today's Ecuador, and Venezuela. It was created after the dissolution in 1830 of Gran Colombia. The Republic was established after the dissolution of the Republic of Colombia (Great Colombia) with secession of Ecuador (Quito, Guayaquil and Azuay) and Venezuela (with Orinoco, Apure and Zulia) and was formed by the departments of Boyaca, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Magdalena and Istmo, all in the current Republic of Colombia (except Istmo that is the current Panama). On November 1831 those departments created the Republic of Nueva Granada, but nothing was established about symbols. Old symbols were confirmed provisional by the National Convention of 17 December 1831. It is not clear what flag it was: Restrepo believes that it is the flag with two cornucopias of Great Colombia. While new symbols were discussed some proposals were issued. On 9 May 1834, the national flag was adopted and was used until 26 November 1861, with the Great Colombian colors in Veles arrangement. Merchant ensign has the eighpointed star in white. In 1851 a new civil war broke out when conservative and pro-slavery groups from Cauca and Antioquia, led by Manuel Ibánez, Julio Arboleda and Eusebio Borrero, revolted against liberal president José Hilario López, trying to stop the process of freeing the slaves, and in addition to a number of religious issues.


== Colombian Constitution of 1832Edit ==
One of the prime features of the political climate of the republic was the position of the Catholic Church and the level of autonomy for the federal states. In 1839, dispute arose over the shutting down of monasteries by the Congress of New Granada. This soon escalated into the War of the Supremes, which raged for the next two years and transformed into a conflict about regional autonomy.
New Granada was transformed in 1858 to the Granadine Confederation as an answer to demands for a decentralized country.


== ProvincesEdit ==

The territory of the Republic was divided into provinces. Each province was composed of one or more cantons, each canton was divided into several districts parish.
Likewise, the Republic covered some territories in the peripheries of the country.


== See alsoEdit ==
Colombia