"Robber baron" is a derogatory term of social criticism originally applied to certain wealthy and powerful 19th-century American businessmen. The term appeared as early as the August 1870 issue of The Atlantic Monthly magazine. By the late 1800s, the term was typically applied to businessmen who used exploitative practices to amass their wealth. These practices included exerting control over natural resources, influencing high levels of government, paying subsistence wages, squashing competition by acquiring their competitors to create monopolies and raise prices, and schemes to sell stock at inflated prices to unsuspecting investors. The term combines the sense of criminal ("robber") and illegitimate aristocracy (a baron is an illegitimate role in a republic).

We hear now on all sides the term "robber barons" applied to some of the great capitalists. ... The old robber barons of the Middle Ages who plundered sword in hand and lance in rest were more honest than this new aristocracy of swindling millionaires.
—Lida F. Baldwin, quoting the August 1870 issue of The Atlantic Monthly, writing in 1907 about how little business had changed in 35 years.


== HistoryEdit ==

The term robber baron derives from the medieval German lords who charged nominally illegal tolls (tolls unauthorized by the Holy Roman Emperor) on the primitive roads crossing their lands or the larger tolls on ships traversing the Rhine—all such actions without adding anything of value, (see robber baron) but instead lining one's pockets to the detriment (added costs) of the common good.
U.S. political and economic commentator Matthew Josephson further popularized the term during the Great Depression in a 1934 book by the same title. He attributed the phrase to an 1880 anti-monopoly pamphlet about railroad magnates. Like the German antecedent princes, Josephson alleged that American big businessmen amassed huge fortunes immorally, unethically, and unjustly. The theme was popular during the Great Depression amid public scorn for big business.
After the Depression, business historian, Allan Nevins, challenged this view of American big businessmen by advocating the "Industrial Statesman" thesis. Nevins, in his John D. Rockefeller: The Heroic Age of American Enterprise (2 vols., 1940), took on Josephson. He argued that while Rockefeller may have engaged in some unethical and illegal business practices, this should not overshadow his bringing order to industrial chaos of the day. Gilded Age capitalists, according to Nevins, sought to impose order and stability on competitive business, and that their work made the United States the foremost economy by the 20th century.
This debate about the morality of certain business practices has continued, with the term being applied to modern industrialists and media moguls.


== In popular cultureEdit ==
In the 1970s the student body of Stanford University voted to use "Robber Barons" as the nickname for their sports teams. However, school administrators disallowed it, saying it was disrespectful to the school's founder, Leland Stanford. No other mascot won acceptance so the teams are known as the Cardinal (the color, not the bird).


== List of businessmen who were labeled as robber baronsEdit ==
The people here are listed in Josephson, Robber Barons or in the cited source,
John Jacob Astor (real estate, fur) – New York
Andrew Carnegie (steel) – Pittsburgh and New York
William A. Clark (copper) – Butte, Montana
Jay Cooke (finance) – Philadelphia
Charles Crocker (railroads) – California
Daniel Drew (finance) – New York
James Buchanan Duke (tobacco) – Durham, North Carolina
Marshall Field (retail) – Chicago
James Fisk (finance) – New York
Henry Morrison Flagler (railroads, oil) – New York and Florida
Henry Clay Frick (steel) – Pittsburgh and New York
John Warne Gates (barbed wire, oil) – Texas
Jay Gould (railroads) – New York
Edward Henry Harriman (railroads) – New York
Charles T. Hinde (railroads, water transport, shipping, hotels) – Illinois, Missouri, Kentucky, California
Mark Hopkins (railroads) – California
Collis Potter Huntington (railroads) – California
Andrew W. Mellon (finance, oil) – Pittsburgh
J. P. Morgan (finance, industrial consolidation) – New York
John Cleveland Osgood (coal mining, iron) – Colorado
Henry B. Plant (railroads) – Florida
John D. Rockefeller (oil) – Cleveland, New York
Charles M. Schwab (steel) – Pittsburgh and New York
Joseph Seligman (banking) – New York
John D. Spreckels (water transport, railroads, sugar) – California
Leland Stanford (railroads) – California
Cornelius Vanderbilt (water transport, railroads) – New York
Charles Tyson Yerkes (street railroads) – Chicago


== See alsoEdit ==
Business magnate
Captain of industry


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further readingEdit ==
Beatty, Jack. (2008). Age of Betrayal: The Triumph of Money in America, 1865-1900 Vintage Books. ISBN 1400032423
Fraser, Steve. (2015). The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0316185434
Josephson, Matthew. (1934). The Robber Barons: The Great American Capitalists, 1861–1901
White, Richard (2012). Railroaded: The Transcontinentals and the Making of Modern America. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393342376. 
Zinn, Howard. (2005). "Chapter 11: Robber Barons and Rebels" from A People's History of the United States Harper Perennial. ISBN 0060838655


== External linksEdit ==
The Dark Side of the Gilded Age. The Atlantic, June 12, 2007
Full Show: The New Robber Barons. Moyers & Company. December 19, 2014.
Industrial Age in America: Robber Barons or Captains of Industry EDSITEment lesson from National Endowment for the Humanities