See Government of Colombia for a broader perspective of Colombian government.
Taxation in Colombia is determined by the Congress of Colombia, the Department of Colombia Assemblies and the Municipalities of Colombia councils, which determine what kind of taxes can be levied and which rates can be applied. The country inherited a harsh and diffused taxation policy from the Spanish Empire characterized by a heavy reliance on customs duties, due to the relatively low capacity for local production of goods. Both the national and local governments' budgets run significant deficits.


== National taxes ==
National taxes are administered by the National Taxes and Customs Direction (DIAN). Some of these taxes include:
IVA
The value-added tax (IVA) is the main indirect tax. This tax is 16 percent of the price of merchandise, goods and services with some exceptions: public transportation, water supply and sanitation and the transportation of natural gas and hydrocarbons. The DIAN recognizes two separate categories (regimenes) of IVA: common and simplified. The first refers to businesses with estimated patrimony over 68 million Colombian pesos (about 34,000 USD), and the second refers to those with patrimony less than that. Although both are obligated to pay the same percentage, the simplified taxpayers are not obligated to conduct separate bookkeeping for the IVA or to generate invoices.
Stamp tax
The stamp tax (Spanish: impuesto de timbre) is a tax on the expedition of an official document (or on the validity of private documents), such as a contract or contractual modification.
Financial transactions tax
A 0.4% tax rate is imposed on all all financial transactions, including withdraw money from ATM, promissory notes, wire transfers, internet banking, bank drafts and bank checks, money on term deposit, overdrafts, installment loans, securities underwriting commitments and other forms of off-balance sheet exposures, safekeeping of documents and other items in safe deposit boxes, currency exchange or unit trusts.
Patrimony tax
This tax requires the annual payment of 0.3% of the total patrimony of people with patrimony estimated over 3 billion pesos (about 1.5 million USD).
Income tax
Corporations: Income tax (Spanish: Impuesto a la renta y complementarios) must be paid by all local and foreign corporations operating in Colombia, who are subject to a corporate tax of 33%.
Individuals: Colombian citizens and foreign nationals who have lived continuously in Colombia for a total of five years are thereafter subject to individual Income tax based on a system of graduated marginal tax rates.
The table below shows the tax rate in units of UVT (Unidad de Valor Tributario), in which 1 UVT = $29,753 COP for 2016.


== Local taxes ==
This group of taxes includes:
Impuesto a ganadores de loterías: Tax on lottery winnings
Impuesto a loterías foráneas: Tax on out-of-state lottery tickets
Impuesto al consumo de cervezas, sifones y refajos: Tax on beer
Impuesto al consumo de licores, vinos, aperitivos y similares: Tax on liquor
Impuesto al consumo de cigarrillos: Tax on cigarettes
Impuesto al consumo de gasolina: Tax on gasoline
Degüello de ganado mayor: Tax on slaughterhouses
Impuesto de registro: Tax to register academic degrees, patents, names, etc.
Impuesto sobre vehículos automotores: Tax on automobiles
Impuesto de industria y comercio: Tax on industrial or commercial establishments
Impuesto de avisos y tableros: Tax on advertising
Impuesto predial: Real estate tax


== References ==


== External links ==
Taxes in Colombia Official Investment Portal
[2] Impuestos en Colombia