The University of Wisconsin Press (sometimes abbreviated as UW Press) is a non-profit university press publishing peer-reviewed books and journals. It primarily publishes work by scholars from the global academic community but also serves the citizens of Wisconsin by publishing important books about Wisconsin, the Upper Midwest, and the Great Lakes region. The Press’s mission also includes publishing work that contributes to a literate culture and to civic conversation. Terrace Books is an imprint of the press. The press also publishes the annual Brittingham Prize in Poetry.
The Press was founded in 1936 in Madison and is one of more than 120 member presses in the Association of American University Presses. The Journals Division was established in 1965. Currently the Press employs approximately 25 full and part-time staff, produces 40 to 60 new books a year, and publishes 11 journals. It also distributes books and some annual journals for selected smaller publishers. The Press is a unit of the Graduate School of the University of Wisconsin–Madison and serves the University of Wisconsin's overall mission of research, instruction, and outreach beyond the university.


== Books Division ==
Since its first book appeared in 1937, the Press has published and distributed more than 3,000 titles. The Press has more than 1,400 titles currently in print, including:
scholarly books: American studies and modern American history, African studies, anthropology, Classical studies, dance history, environmental studies, film/cinema history, gay & lesbian studies, modern European and Irish history, Jewish studies, Slavic and Eastern European studies, Southeast Asian Studies, and other subjects
regional books: Wisconsin, the Upper Midwest, and the Great Lakes region
books of general interest: natural history, poetry, biography, fiction, food, travel.


== Poetry prizes ==
Sponsored by the UW Department of English, UW Press annually awards the Brittingham Prize in Poetry, the Felix Pollak Prize in Poetry, and The Four Lakes Prize in Poetry.


== See also ==

Arctic Anthropology
Contemporary Literature
Ecquid Novi
Land Economics
Luso-Brazilian Review


== Journals Division ==
American Orthoptic Journal
Arctic Anthropology
Contemporary Literature
Ecological Restoration
Ecquid Novi: African Journalism Studies
Journal of Human Resources
Land Economics
Landscape Journal
Luso-Brazilian Review
Monatshefte
SubStance


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Wisconsin Press University of Wisconsin Press home page
University of Wisconsin Press Journals Division University of Wisconsin Press Journals Division