The Vice President of Colombia is the first in the presidential line of succession, becoming the new President of Colombia upon leaves of absence or death, resignation, or removal of the President, as designated by the Colombian Constitution of 1991 which also reinstated the vice president figure after almost a century of being abolished during the presidency of Rafael Núñez. The Vice President cannot assume Presidential functions on temporary absences of the President such as official trips abroad or vacations. In these cases, the President delegates functions to a cabinet member, usually the Minister of the Interior. The current Vice President of Colombia is German Vargas Lleras.


== Eligibility ==
The vice president must be a natural-born citizen of Colombia, at least 30 years of age.[1] The Colombian Constitution of 1991 requires the vice president to meet the same eligibility requirements as the president that can be re-elected. It is also eligible for an unlimited number of terms as vice president.


== Current functions ==
The Vice President has the same period of functions that the President of Colombia and will replace him in case of temporary or complete absences. The Vice President can also be authorized by the President special missions (like to represent him on international diplomatic visits) or designate him in any position of the Colombian Executive branch of Power.
Every President has defined the Vice President's functions within their government.


=== Constitutional mandate ===
According to the Decree 2719 of December 17, 2000 in the Colombian Constitution of 1991 which modified the structure of the Administrative Department of the Presidency of the Republic, the functions of the Vice President are:
To execute special missions set by the President of Colombia and in accordance with the Colombian Constitution.
Advise the President on the execution of policies and politics regarding Human Rights and Corruption.
Collaborate with the Colombian government's management of international and national activities regarding Human Rights and corruption.
Plan mechanisms to harmonize agreements between the different levels of the executive government in Colombia on issues regarding Human Rights and corruption.
Represent Colombia internationally as ordered by the President.
By determination of the President, the Vice President will support and advise the President on other issues.
Other functions will be addressed according to the needs of the President.


== See also ==
List of Vice Presidents of Colombia
Presidential Designate
List of Presidential Designates of Colombia

President of Colombia
List of Presidents of Colombia

Human rights in Colombia
List of current vice presidents


== References ==
Vice Presidencia de Colombia official website
Biblioteca Luis Angel Arango - List of Vice Presidents of Colombia