The STEPS Centre (Social, Technological and Environmental Pathways to Sustainability) is an interdisciplinary global research and policy engagement hub, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council. The Centre brings together development studies with science and technology studies and was launched at Portcullis House in London on 25 June 2007 
By acknowledging the interactions between social, technological and environmental factors in diverse local settings the STEPS Centre seeks to help create more sustainable and socially just conditions for poorer people. Based at the Institute of Development Studies (IDS) and the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU) at the University of Sussex in the UK, the Centre works with partners in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Professor Ian Scoones  is the director of the STEPS Centre and Professor Andy Stirling  is co-director. Professor Melissa Leach  stepped down as STEPS Director in 2014 to become Director of the Institute of Development Studies.


== Advisory board ==
The STEPS Centre Advisory Board is chaired by Mike Hulme (King's College London) with members including Brian Wynne (CESAGEN, University of Lancaster), Carl Folke (Stockholm Resilience Centre), Dipak Gyawali (Nepal Academy of Science and Technology), Fred Pearce (science writer), Sue Hartley (Director, York Environmental Sustainability Institute), Suman Sahai (Convenor, Gene Campaign), and Thomas Lingard (Global External Affairs Director, Unilever).


== Areas of work ==
The STEPS Centre brings together social scientists and natural scientists to work together to try and achieve a breakthrough in thinking and action for development. The Centre's unique ‘pathways’ approach interweaves social, technological and environmental conditions with dynamic change  across three domains - food and agriculture; health and disease; water and sanitation - and three themes - dynamics; governance; designs.
Through linking across domains and themes in its projects, the STEPS Centre connects new theory with practical approaches in a bid to help provide sustainable opportunities for poor and marginalised people.


== Pathways approach ==
The STEPS Centre's pathways approach aims to understand the complex, non-linear interactions between social, technological and environmental systems. Some pathways may threaten poor peoples’ livelihoods and health while others create opportunities for sustainability.
The Centre aims to link social scientists, natural scientists and users to develop new tools and methods linking theory with practical solutions. It also offers teaching, in conjunction with IDS and SPRU, to help train a new generation of researchers on MA and PhD courses.
A paper published in 2007 entitled Pathways to Sustainability: an Overview of the STEPS Centre Approach  outlined the STEPS Centre approach to understanding dynamic systems and their governance. The paper laid out the ingredients of the STEPS Centre's work, including linking diverse social and natural science perspectives, connecting theory, policy and practice and an engaged, interactive approach to communications. Promoting pathways to Sustainability that meet the perspectives and priorities of poor and marginalised groups is at the heart of the pathways approach.


== Policy engagement ==
The STEPS Centre seeks to ensure that environmental sustainability and making science and technology work for the poor become principal concerns for the people that make policy. It aims to advance policy debate through collaborative work with local, national and international government, and governmental agencies that generates debate and enhances citizen engagement.


== Projects ==
Among the STEPS Centre's projects are:
•Innovation, Sustainability, Development: A New Manifesto (40 years on from the Sussex Manifesto)
A New Manifesto
• Crop, disease and innovation in Kenya - Maize and farming system dynamics in areas affected by climate change
Maize and climate change in Kenya
• Urbanisation in Asia - urbanisation and sustainability on the expanding peri-urban fringe of Delhi, India
Urbanisation in Asia
• Rethinking regulation - assumptions and realities of drug and seed regulation in China and Argentina
Rethinking Regulation
• Risk, uncertainty and technology - framing and responses to risks and uncertainties in areas of rapid scientific and technological advance
Risk, uncertainty and technology
• Epidemics, livelihoods and politics - HIV-AIDS, SARS, ‘avian flu, BSE - procedures for addressing epidemics that support rather than compromise poor people
Epidemics, livelihoods and politics


== Further reading ==
Dynamic Sustainabilities: Technology, Environment, Social Justice
By Leach. M, Scoones, I. and Stirling, A. (2010) ISBN 978-1-84971-093-0
Pathways to Sustainability: an overview of the STEPS Centre approach
By Leach. M., Scoones, I. and Stirling, A. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-656-5
Dynamics: Dynamic Systems and the Challenge of Sustainability
By Scoones, I., Leach, M., Smith, A., Stagl, S., Stirling, A. and Thompson, J. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-650-3
Understanding Governance: pathways to sustainability
By Leach, M., Bloom, G., Ely, A., Nightingale, P., Scoones, I., Shah, E. and Smith, A. (2007) – ISBN 978-1-85864-651-0
Empowering Designs: towards more progressive appraisal of sustainability
By Stirling, A., Leach, M., Mehta, L., Scoones, I., Smith, A., Stagl, S. and Thompson, J. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-652-7
Agri-food System Dynamics: pathways to sustainability in an era of uncertainty
By Thompson, J., Millstone, E., Scoones, I., Ely, A., Marshall, F., Shah, E.and Stagl, S. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-653-4
Health in a Dynamic World
By Bloom, G., Edström, J., Leach, M., Lucas, H., MacGregor, H., Standing, H. and Waldman, L. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-654-1
Liquid Dynamics: challenges for sustainability in water and sanitation
By Mehta, L., Marshall, F., Movik, S., Stirling, A., Shah, E., Smith, A. and Thompson, J. (2007) ISBN 978-1-85864-655-8
Time to outbreed animal science? A cattle-breeding system exploiting structural unpredictability: the WoDaaBe herders in Niger
By Krätli, S. (2008) The ISBN printed in the document (978 1 85864 699 5) is invalid, causing a checksum error.
The Slow Race: Making technology work for the poor
By Melissa Leach, Ian Scoones (2006) Demos pamphlet ISBN 1-84180-162-3
More STEPS Centre publications


== References ==
^ STEPS towards better development by Mark Tran, The Guardian
^ IDS Profile for Ian Scoones
^ Path-finder by Andrew Lee, The Engineer, 2007
^ Melissa Leach: Village voice. To know what's happening around the world, you must ask the locals by Jessica Shepherd, The Guardian
^ Perspectives by Priya Shetty, The Lancet, Jun 2008
^ [1]
^ Building genuine pathways to a more secure future, ESRC Today
^ Pathways to Sustainability: An overview of the STEPS Centre's Approach


== External links ==
The STEPS Centre
STEPS Centre blog
The STEPS Centre's YouTube channel
The STEPS Centre's photostream on Flickr