A no-frills or no frills service or product is one for which the non-essential features have been removed to keep the price low. The use of the term "frills" refers to a style of fabric decoration. Something offered to customers for no additional charge may be designated as a "frill" - for example, free drinks on airline journeys, or a radio installed in a rental car. No-frills businesses operate on the principle that by removing luxurious additions, customers may be offered lower prices.
Common products and services for which no-frills brands exist include airlines, supermarkets, vacations and vehicles.


== No-frills airlinesEdit ==

No-frills airlines are airlines that offer low fares but eliminate all non-essential services, such as complimentary food, in-flight entertainment systems, business-class seating etc. A no-frills airline will typically cut overhead by flying from more remote airports (with lower access charges) and by using a single type of aircraft. Aircraft cabin interiors may be fitted out with minimum comforts, dispensing with luxuries such as seat-back video screens, reclining seats and blinds; some airlines choose to carry advertising inside the cabin to increase revenue. Should meals be served, they must be paid for in full.
Some airlines also extend the definition of "frills" to include standard services and conveniences; for example, a no-frills airline may charge passengers an additional fee for check-in luggage, using airport check-in desks, or even providing wheelchairs.


== No-frills holidayEdit ==
No-frills holidays are holidays which, like no-frills airlines, do not include unnecessary services such as:
in-flight meals
travel representatives
transfers between the airport and the hotel
entertainment
luxury accommodation
Such holidays usually have a simple fare scheme, in which fares typically increase during peak seasons, and also as more people sign up for the holiday. This rewards early reservations, and is known as "yield management".
Examples of no-frills holiday companies are:
Just, part of the Thomson/TUI group
Qbic Low Cost Design Hotels


== No-frills supermarketsEdit ==

No-frills supermarkets are recognisable by their store design and business model.
They do not decorate aisles and sometimes they don't even fill shelves. In this case, pallets of the products on offer are simply parked alongside the aisles, and customers picking up products will gradually empty them. When all items on a pallet have been sold, they are replaced. Prices are given on plain labels.
Queueing at the checkout is relatively common, as staffing levels reflect average demand rather than peak demand. At actual peak times, customers often have to wait.
Shopping bags are charged for, as they are seen as a frill. Thus many shoppers bring reusable shopping bags, buy shopping bags at a low fee, put their shopping in the cardboard boxes that the products originally came in, or put it directly in their shopping cart; customers must bag their own purchases.
They work on the principle that in most supermarkets, 20% of products on sale account for 80% of what people buy. Therefore, they only stock the most commonly sold products.
They only take cash and debit cards (although this has changed in many stores over the years due to the high usage of credit cards).
They only open at peak times i.e. 9 am to 6 pm Monday to Saturday, although a few stores are 24hrs.
They often do not serve branded items, except in the case of special purchases, which are almost always at a discounted price. Instead, they sell generic or private label products.
The shopping carts have a coin-operated slot, to ensure that the trolleys are kept on site.
They usually lack butcher, bakery and deli counters.
Staff (or even the managers sometimes) do the cleaning.
No in-store background music, although some use Satellite Radio.
Examples of no-frills supermarkets are:
Bottom Dollar Food (United States).
Save-A-Lot (United States).
Colruyt (Belgium), (France), (Luxembourg), (Netherlands).
Lidl (Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, and United Kingdom).
Aldi (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, United States, and United Kingdom).
Franklins (also sells the "No Frills" generic product range) (Australia)
Rite Price (sell low/out of code and discontinued lines) (Australia)
Food Basics, a subsidiary of A&P (United States)
Food Basics, a subsidiary of A&P Canada, formerly owned by A&P, but sold to Metro Inc. in 2005 (Canada)
FreshCo, a subsidiary of Sobeys (Canada)
Maxi, a subsidiary of Loblaw Companies (Canada)
No-Frills, a subsidiary of Loblaw Companies (Canada).
Super C, a division of Metro Inc. based in Québec.
Biedronka, a subsidiary of Jerónimo Martins (Poland)
Bónus (Iceland).
Poundland (United Kingdom).
Netto (Denmark, France, Germany, Sweden, Poland, Lanzarote)
REMA 1000 (Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Slovakia).
Denner (Switzerland) used to be a no-frills retailer, but has started polishing its image.
Pak'n Save (New Zealand)
Dia* (Spain, Greece, Turkey, Brazil, China, Argentina, Portugal)
Leader Price, France
Minipreço* (Portugal)
Ed* (France)
Usave, a subsidiary of the Shoprite chain (South Africa, Angola, Ghana, Malawi, Swaziland and Namibia)
Dia, Minipreço and Ed are all part of the Dia Group, which is in turn part of the Carrefour Group. (Brazil, Spain)
Wilkinson (UK)
WinCo Foods (Washington, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and California)


== No-frills automobilesEdit ==

In the United States, a no-frills automobile model typically has a minimum of convenience equipment, a less powerful engine and spartan trim.
Frequently, these models represent the lowest-priced version of a larger selection of more lavishly equipped and trimmed models of that same car. Often, the less-expensive models are sold with a manual transmission and have a shorter options list. Early 1950s American examples include the Chevrolet 150 and Kaiser-Frazer Henry J. These were larger cars than those produced in the US in the 1940s gasoline rationing period by Crosley, who shut down in 1952.
One of the more famous no-frills cars was the Studebaker Scotsman, which was on sale from 1957 to 1958. These cars came with a low-grade cloth-trimmed front seat and contained only a driver's side sunvisor, no door armrests and painted trim (in lieu of chrome trim); even routine convenience items, such as a cigarette lighter and dome light were deleted. Buyers were allowed to buy only a low-cost heater and a few other trim and convenience items from a short options list; a radio was not offered as an option on this model (unlike Studebaker's more expensive models).
During the 1960s and early 1970s, American automakers offered several trim levels of full-sized models (each having a different name), with a price-leading no-frills versions. Examples included the Chevrolet Biscayne, Ford Custom 500, and Plymouth Fury I. While ostensibly targeted toward fleet buyers and business customers where luxury is not a concern, these cars were also available to private customers. While many of these cars were typically sold with the standard six-cylinder or basic V-8 engine with the standard three-speed manual transmission, many of these price-leading models were also available with the full range of engines and transmissions, including those that were performance-oriented, unlike the later no-frills models that had restricted performance options.
During the gasoline crisis of the 1970s, many American automakers began offering no-frills models on their compact lines of cars (such as the Ford Pinto MPG, and Plymouth Duster "Feather Duster"). As before, these models usually had spartan trim (vinyl seats with rubber floor covering); fewer convenience items than the more expensive models (i.e. no cigarette lighter); lighter-weight components (such as aluminum on various engine, body and suspension components); and a manual transmission.

Most no-frills cars are sold to fleet buyers, such as taxi companies or police departments. However, these models are generally available to cost-conscious private customers whose primary concerns were price, fuel economy and basic low-cost transportation.
The concept of a no-frills car in the European market was common in the 1950s with cars such as the Ford Abeille or the Citroën ID Normale. The Dacia Logan is a remarkable example of a recent no-frills car in Europe. Another example is Fiat Albea.
In Argentina and Brazil, the no-frills category takes a considerable share of the new car market. Costs cuts in base versions are listed, but not limited to:
Very little or no soundproofing
Low quality plastics
Substitution of rubber on the dashboard to cheaper (rough) plastic
String-based instead of acceleration-based seatbelt retraction mechanisms
No seatbelt height adjustment
No anti-lock braking systems or airbags, except where required by law
No seat height adjustment
No steering wheel adjustments
Cheaper paint processes
Facelifted models instead of new generations such as Volkswagen Santana, Fiat Palio, Fiat Uno, Volkswagen Kombi, Volkswagen Citi Golf, Chevrolet Corsa
Cast iron cylinder heads and engine blocks
No lambda sensor
Retrofitting old generation components (older, less efficient engines, platforms, dashboard components) on a European designed vehicle: Ford Fiesta, Fiat Idea, Fiat Punto, Chevrolet Meriva, Volkswagen Polo.
No lamps on the lateral direction lights or remotion of the lateral direction lights at all
Single-piece plastic bumpers; any grills are designed by placing indentations on the plastic
Low-quality springs on the suspension, compensated by a taller and harder adjustment
Less maintenance on the tools used to build the vehicles
Smaller and more restrictive catalytic converters
In some specific markets, very aggressive forms of no-frills cars may be available. For example, the supermini and city cars sold at the Mercosur markets, such as the Chevrolet Celta, Chevrolet Corsa, Fiat Uno, Fiat Palio, Ford Ka and Volkswagen Gol tend to be noisy and feature cost cuttings like:
No lock on the fuel cap
Elimination of nearly all process to polish or finish the molded plastic parts
Substitution of black plastics by cheaper gray ones, even on unpainted bumpers
1-liter engine (due to Brazil's taxation according to the engine displacement)
Ultra-short gearbox, with the 5th gear scaled as the 4th gear of a regular 1.3 vehicle.
Cheaper mufflers
Thinner wheels (e.g. 145/80 R13 tires)
Instrument panel only with speedometer, fuel gauge and warning lamps
Two-point seatbelts or non-retractable three-point seatbelts for the rear passengers
No rear headrests
Fixed rear windows
No anti-roll bar
Smaller and thinner disk brakes, often non-ventilated
Very thin and low quality trunk carpet
No side carpets inside of the trunk and any other trunk carpet
No cigarette lighter
Less plastic interior coverings, including the covers of the front seat's rails
No rear window wiper
No rear window defogger
Only two-speeds for the internal fan
Cheaper, noisier internal fan
Cheaper, imprecise mechanisms for setting the internal ventilation direction and heating.


== No frills gymsEdit ==
Compared from regular fitness gyms, there has been a growing number of no frills gyms. No frills gyms are noted from regular gyms. These differ in noted ways include:
No reception, Everything like registration, booking classes etc. is done on-line.
No fitness classes, or fitness classes are available at a supplementary cost on top of regular monthly membership fees.
No swimming pool, hot tub, sauna, solarium or beauty spa. Due to cost of running such facilities, e.g. a requirement to have a member of staff being there at all times and frequent cleaning. They are often non-existent.
No café or relaxation room, drinks and snacks are available through vending machines.
Most of the fitness machines are self-powered, rather than electrically powered thus cutting down of power costs and running costs.
Examples of no frills gyms are easyGym, Fit4less and PureGym in the UK, and McFit in Germany.


== Other no-frills companiesEdit ==
Other examples of no-frills companies includes, but not limited to: Cinemas (easyCinema), bus companies (easyBus, Magic Bus (Stagecoach), Eastern), food ranges (Tesco Value, Walmart/Asda SmartPrice), mobile phone companies (easyMobile, Telmore), hotels (easyHotel, Ibis Budget, Motel 6, Tune Hotels), and Marketing (low-cost.marketing).


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
No Frills: The Truth Behind the Low-Cost Revolution in the Skies By Simon Calder, 2003 ISBN 0-7535-0770-6
America's Cheap Sleeps: No-Frills, Budget Accommodations for $40 Or Less Per Night By Tracy Whitcombe, 1998 ISBN 1-883323-81-9