Anti-abortion movements are involved in the abortion debate advocating against the practice of abortion and its legality. Many anti-abortion movements began as countermovements in response to legalization of elective abortions. The Anti-abortion movement helps to educate the general public on the topic of abortion. The Anti-abortion movement has also helped women that have had abortions find help if they need it. Sometimes organizations within the anti-abortion movement support adoption instead of abortion.


== Terminology ==
By some, especially in the media, the terms used in the debate are seen as political framing: they are terms used to validate one's own stance while invalidating the opposition's. For example, the labels "pro-choice" and "pro-life" imply endorsement of widely held values such as liberty and freedom, while suggesting that the opposition must be "anti-choice" or "anti-life" (alternatively "pro-coercion" or "pro-death"). The Associated Press favors the terms "abortion rights" and "anti-abortion" instead.
However, some in the "pro-life" movement view the term "anti-abortion" as an inaccurate media label as well.  For example, not all who would describe themselves as "pro-life" are opposed to abortion if the life of the mother is in certain danger. Also for many in the "Pro-life" movement, the word "life" reflects the core value and truth for which they sincerely believe their causes represents. An argument can be made that human life begins before birth (i.e. at conception, when the genetic material which will develop into a fetus first assumes zygote form and acquires unique DNA) and that human life is valuable and worthy of protection at all stages. This view is heavily influenced by religious belief in most cases, and there is significant philosophical dispute regarding whether human DNA acquires humanity and human rights upon first development, or upon fetal viability.


== Philosophical and legal arguments ==

Anti-abortion advocates cite numerous moral and philosophical arguments against both the acceptability or legality of abortion. Many advocates also hold religious objections to abortion.


== Movements by country ==


=== Europe ===

In Europe, abortion has been legalized through parliamentary acts. In Western Europe this has had the effect at once of both more closely regulating the use of abortion, and at the same time mediating and reducing the impact anti-abortion campaigns have had on the law.
France
The first specifically pro-life organization in France, Laissez-les-vivre-SOS futures mères, was created in 1971 during the debate that was to lead to the Veil Law in 1975. Its main spokesman was the geneticist Jérôme Lejeune. Since 2005, the French pro-life movement has organized an annual March for Life.
Ireland
There are two major pro-life groups in the Republic of Ireland, Pro Life Campaign and Youth Defence.
Liechtenstein
In Liechtenstein an application to legalize abortions was rejected by a slim majority in a referendum in 2011. The opponents, which included Prince Alois, got 500 votes more and eventually settle at 52.3 percent compared with 47.7 percent.
Prince Alois had announced the use of his veto in advance if necessary to prevent the introduction of abortion.
Spain
In Spain, over one million demonstrators took part in a march in Madrid in October 2009 to protest plans by the government of José Luis Zapatero to legalize elective abortions and eliminate parental consent restrictions.
In 2010 1,067,315 Spaniards signed a petition against the liberal abortion policy of the socialist government. The petition was launched by the organizations "Derecho a vivir" (right to life) and "Hazteoir" (Let your voice be heard).
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the most prominent pro-life organization is the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children. It was formed to "uphold the principle of respect for human life, in particular the life of the unborn child" at the time of the passage of the 1967 Abortion Act which liberalized abortion law. It was the first such organization in the world.


=== Israel ===
In Israel, the major pro-life organization is Efrat. Efrat activists primarily raise funds to relieve the "financial and social pressures" on pregnant women so that they will not terminate their pregnancies. Efrat is not known to do any other kind of activism.


=== North and South America ===
Canada
The Canadian organization Canada Silent No More advocates legislation prohibiting late-term and partial birth abortions.
Chile
The Chilean movement it's called Siempre por la Vida (always for the life)
United States

The United States pro-life movement formed as a response to the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade Supreme Court decision. A smaller movement is the consistent life ethic which started in 1983 and opposes all forms of killing including abortion.


== See also ==
History of abortion law debate
Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
Anti-abortion violence
Crisis pregnancy center
Pregnancy from rape#Opposition to legal abortion
Fetal rights


== References ==


== External links ==
List of international pro-life organizations