The Arab states of the Persian Gulf are the seven Arab states which border the Persian Gulf, namely Kuwait, Bahrain, Iraq, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). All of these nations (with the exception of Iraq) are part of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf.
Geographically, the Arabic-speaking Gulf is solely Eastern Arabia. The borders of the Persian Gulf do not extend beyond Eastern Arabia. Hejaz, Najd and South Arabia are not part of the Persian Gulf. The Arabs of Eastern Arabia speak a dialect known as Gulf Arabic. Most Saudis do not speak Gulf Arabic because most Saudis do not live in Eastern Arabia. There are only 200,000 Gulf Arabic speakers in Saudi Arabia, mostly in the coastal eastern region.


== Cultures ==

The inhabitants of Eastern Arabia's Gulf coast share similar cultures and music styles such as fijiri, sawt and liwa. The most noticeable cultural trait of Eastern Arabia's Gulf Arabs is their orientation and focus towards the sea. Maritime-focused life in the small Persian Gulf Arab states has resulted in a sea-oriented society where livelihoods have traditionally been earned in marine industries.
Gulf Arabic is spoken in Eastern Arabia's Gulf coast. Only Arabs of Eastern Arabia speak Gulf Arabic. Most Saudis do not speak Gulf Arabic because most Saudis do not live in Eastern Arabia. There are approximately 200,000 Gulf Arabic speakers in Saudi Arabia, mostly in the coastal eastern region. Gulf Arabic is distinct from Saudi Arabic.
Before the GCC was formed in 1981, the term "Khaleeji" was solely used to refer to the inhabitants of Eastern Arabia. Historically, "Khaleeji" meant descendants of Ichthyophagi, the coast-dwelling "fish eaters".


== Politics ==
Some states are constitutional monarchies with elected parliaments. Bahrain (Majlis al Watani) and Kuwait (Majlis al Ummah) have legislatures with members elected by the population.
The Sultanate of Oman also has an advisory council (Majlis ash-Shura) that is popularly elected. In the UAE, a federation of seven monarchical emirates, the Federal National Council functions only as an advisory body, but some of its members are now chosen via a limited electoral college nominated by the seven rulers. Saudi Arabia remains a hereditary monarchy with limited political representation. In Qatar, an elected national parliament has been mooted and is written into the new constitution, but elections are yet to be held.


== Economy ==

All of these Arab states have significant revenues from petroleum. The United Arab Emirates has been successfully diversifying the economy. 71% of UAE's total GDP comes from non-oil sectors. Oil accounts for only 2% of Dubai's GDP. Bahrain has the Persian Gulf's first "post-oil" economy because the Bahraini economy does not rely on oil. Since the late 20th century, Bahrain has heavily invested in the banking and tourism sectors. The country's capital, Manama is home to many large financial structures. Bahrain has a high Human Development Index (ranked 48th in the world) and was recognised by the World Bank as a high income economy.
In addition, the small coastal states (especially Bahrain and Kuwait) were successful centers of trade and commerce prior to oil. Eastern Arabia also had significant pearl banks, but the pearling industry collapsed in the 1930s after the development of cultured pearl methods by Japanese scientists.
According to the World Bank, most of these Arab states have been the world's most generous donors of aid as a share of GDP.


== See also ==

Eastern Arabia
Persian Gulf
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, originally (and still) known as the "Gulf Cooperation Council" (GCC).
Iran-Arab relations
Gulf/2000 Project
List of the busiest airports in the Arab states of Persian Gulf


== Further reading ==
Madawi Al-Rasheed, ed. (2005). Transnational Connections and the Arab Gulf. 
Lawrence G. Potter, ed. (2009). The Persian Gulf in History. 
Lawrence G. Potter, ed. (2014). Sectarian Politics in the Persian Gulf. 
"The Gulf's ancient Ethnic Diversity: An Evolutionary History" in Security in the Persian Gulf: Origins, Obstacles and the Search for Consensus, Edited by G. Sick and L. Potter, pp. 284.


== References ==


== External links ==
Gulf2000
Gulf Research Center