Batalhão de Operações Policiais Especiais (PMERJ) (Portuguese: [bataˈʎɐ̃w dʒi opeɾaˈsõjs poliˈsjajs ispeˈsjajs]; literally "Special Police Operations Battalion") or BOPE is a special police unit of the Military Police of Rio de Janeiro State (PMERJ) in Brazil.
Due to the nature of crime in favelas, BOPE units have extensive experience in urban warfare as well as progression in confined and restricted environments. It also utilizes equipment deemed more powerful than traditional civilian law enforcement.
BOPE PMERJ, although probably the best known, isn't the only unit of its kind among Brazil's military police districts. Military Police of Alagoas and Military Police of Santa Catarina also call their large tactical units BOPE, while the military police of the Federal District and the State of Piauí call theirs the Batalhão de Operações Especiais or BOE.


== Significant rolesEdit ==

Providing additional security at special events
Break barricades constructed by drug dealers
Shoot to kill at any criminal threatening both civilian or member life
Exterminate drug trafficking criminal factions and all of its members
Extract police officers or civilians injured in confrontations and combats
Rescuing officers and citizens captured by criminals or endangered by gunfire
Serve high-risk arrest warrants
Hostage rescue
Stabilizing situations involving high-risk suicidal subjects
Suppress prison riots at any cause
Support civil police in combats of any kind
Providing superior assault firepower in certain situations
Armed patrols around the favelas
Special missions in swamps or mountainous terrains such as reconnaissance, planning and infiltration
Engage in combat serving state sovereignty
Crime suppression to minimum
Resolving high-risk situations with a minimum loss of life, injury, or property damage
Engage strongly armed criminal factions


== Weapons and vehiclesEdit ==
The force has a fleet of armoured fighting vehicles, which are known as "Pacificador" ("Peacemaker"), or "Caveirão" ("Big Skull") and one UH-1 Huey. These vehicles are used in operations in the slums (favelas) where BOPE face intense conflicts with heavily armed drug dealers. BOPE also operates a wheel loader in order to remove obstacles, barricades and street blockades. BOPE soldiers are equipped with heavy armament:
M16 rifle
M4 carbine
H&K PSG1 sniper rifle
Benelli M3 shotgun
FN P90
IMBEL MD97
H&K MP5 A2 and K
H&K G3
H&K 21
Taurus PT92
IMBEL 9mm
FN FAL
FN PARAFAL
M1 carbine
Frag grenades


== In popular cultureEdit ==


=== Tropa de EliteEdit ===

In 2006, the book Elite da Tropa was published. Written by sociologist Luiz Eduardo Soares and two BOPE officers, Major André Batista and Captain Rodrigo Pimentel, it provides a semi-fictional account of the daily routine of BOPE as well as some historical events, based on the experiences of the latter two. It describes BOPE as a "killing machine" and details an alleged aborted assassination attempt by some police officers on then-governor Leonel Brizola. The book was controversial at the time of release, and reportedly resulted in Batista being reprimanded and censured by the Military Police. The book has been made into a movie, Tropa de Elite (Elite Squad), directed by José Padilha (the director of Bus 174), with a screenplay by Academy Award-nominated screenwriter Bráulio Mantovani. In 2010 the movie gained a sequel, Elite Squad: The Enemy Within.


== ControversyEdit ==
BOPE has generated notoriety due their role in the violent drug war in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro and they have been referred to as a "Death Squad" by multiple newspapers. One aspect that has been pointed out specifically is their logo, which bears a knife in a skull over crossed pistols. According to the official BOPE website, the knife in the skull symbolizes "victory over death" and the crossed pistols are the symbol of the military police.
A 2005 report on extra judicial executions by the New York University School of Law indicated that BOPE was involved in the deaths of 4 teenagers under the pretext that they were drug traffickers who were resisting arrest: "BOPE officers falsified the crime scene in order to incriminate the victims. Hoping this way to make them appear to be gang members. No weapon was found on any of the victims. None of them had any previous history of criminal activity."
Amnesty International declared that "the police forces in Brazil adopt violent and repressive methods. These cause violations of fundamental rights of large parts of the population on a regular basis", and attributes a certain number of killed civilians to BOPE in particular. In March 2006, Amnesty International specifically condemned the use of vans with armoured plating, known as a Caveirão. It stated that deploying the vehicle aggressively, indiscriminately targeting whole communities, highlighted the ineffectiveness of excessive use of force.


== Similar police units of the Brazilian police forceEdit ==
BOE or BOPE are acronyms that can refer to the following specialized military police units:
BOE (Batalhão de Operações Especiais) units:
Special Operations Battalion (PMAC) - in Acre
Special Operations Battalion (PMDF) - in the Federal District
Specials Battalion Operations (PMMT) - in the state of Mato Grosso
Special Operations Battalion (PMPR) - the state of Paraná
Special Operations Battalion (PMPI) - the state of Piauí
BOPE (Batalhão de Operações Policiais Especiais) units:
Special Police Operations Battalion (PMAL) - the state of Alagoas
Special Police Operations Battalion (PMRR) - in the state of Roraima
Special Police Operations Battalion (PMSC) - the state of Santa Catarina
Special Police Operations Battalion (PMERJ) - in the state of Rio de Janeiro
Special Police Operations Battalion (PMRN) - in Rio Grande do Norte state


== See alsoEdit ==
Military Police of Rio de Janeiro State
Pacifying Police Unit
GATE and ROTA (São Paulo Military Police)
National Force of Public Safety (Brazilian federal special response unit)
List of special response units


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
BOPE Rio de Janeiro, official website, in Portuguese
BOPE Federal District of Brasilia official website, in Portuguese
BOPE-POI informativo sobre Unidades Operacionais Especiais das Policias Internacionais.*POLICE – POLIZIA – POLITIE -ПОЛИЦИИ – POLIZEI*