The Bavarian State Police (German: Bayerische Polizei) has approximately 26,100 officers and roughly 3,700 civilian employees and is therefore one of the biggest police forces in Germany.


== Organization ==
The 10 regional police authorities in Bavaria are:
Munich (Polizeipräsidium München)
Central Franconia: Nuremberg
Lower Franconia: Würzburg
Upper Franconia: Bayreuth
Upper Palatinate: Regensburg
Lower Bavaria: Straubing
Upper Bavaria-South: Rosenheim
Upper Bavaria-North: Ingolstadt
Swabia-North: Augsburg
Swabia-South: Kempten
Bavaria reorganised its police structure between 2005 and 2008 to reduce bureaucracy, changing from a four-tier hierarchy (Interior Ministry– Regional administration – Police Department – Police Station) to three levels (Interior Ministry, Regional Police Authority, Police Station). The seven Polizeipräsidien in Würzburg, Bayreuth, Regensburg, Nuremberg, Augsburg, Munich and Oberbayern (HQ in Munich) gave way to the 10 new areas and the Polizeidirektionen disappeared.
The reorganisation required the rewiring of all police radio and emergency notification networks which are not located only at each regional police authority.


== State Investigation Bureau ==
Bavaria is also very interested in cooperation with Eastern European countries. As a significant percentage of Bavaria’s crimes are committed by organized gangs from Eastern Europe, it makes sense to cooperate with the police forces there to stop these gangs. The Bavarian Landeskriminalamt (State Investigation Bureau) is situated in Munich and employs 1,500 officers and civilian staff. Its missions are: witness protection, state security, undercover investigations, statistics, monitoring the development of crime, crime prevention, criminal investigations analysis, exchange of information with foreign countries and forensic science.


== Special Units ==
Bavaria has different special units, which are the
two Spezialeinsatzkommandos (SEK) (SWAT teams), one is stationed in Nuremberg for use in the north of the state and one is attached to the Munich Police Department to cover the south of Bavaria. The SEK of South Bavaria has a mountain detachment for operations in the Alps.
three Mobile Einsatzkommandos (MEK) (mobile response units), one of which is attached to the SEK based in Nuremberg and the other two to the Munich SEK,
four Unterstützungskommandos (USK) (Special Support Groups) attached to the Police Support Group and based in Dachau, Munich, Nuremberg and Würzburg
an Alpine Einsatzzug (Alpine Operations Platoon), based in Rosenheim.


== Police Support ==
The Police Support Group HQ (Bereitschaftspolizeipräsidium) in Bamberg employs 6,000 officers and civilian staff at seven Bereitschaftspolizeiabteilungen (BPA), the police schools, the police orchestra and the police helicopter squadron. The BPAs are situated in Munich, Eichstätt, Würzburg, Nuremberg, Königsbrunn, Dachau and Sulzbach-Rosenberg and have 10 companies as the state’s mobile police reserve. The helicopter squadron has nine modern choppers stationed at Munich Airport and Roth Airfield near Nuremberg. Bavaria has two basic training schools, one professional development school and a police dog school.


== River Police ==
The Bavarian River Police is directly subordinate to the Bavarian Ministry of the Interior. The headquarters is in Nuremberg and has 10 river police stations along the Main and Danube rivers and the Main-Danube Canal. It also supports 14 police stations that cover the major lakes in Bavaria.


== Neighbourhood Watch ==
Citizens in Bavaria have been participating in public safety since 1994. This commitment to civic action is seen in the Sicherheitswacht Neighborhood Watch program, where 530 citizens in 58 Bavarian towns (October 2007) voluntarily assist their local police.


== Equipment ==

The most used car brand is BMW. The most used handgun is Heckler & Koch P7 (9mm).


== Spectacular cases ==
November 9, 1923: Attempted putsch by the NSDAP suppressed by the Bavarian State Police with the Reichswehr.
May 12, 1972: Bomb attack on the main building of the Bavarian State Investigation Bureau in Munich by the Red Army Faction, 3 people were injured and 60 police cars were damaged.
September 5, 1972: Palestinian terrorists attacked the Israeli team during the Olympic Games in Munich, known as the Munich massacre.
August 10, 1994: Discovery of 363 g of plutonium on a smuggler at Munich's Franz Josef Strauss airport; the so-called plutonium affair.
July 1998: Giorgio Basile who killed 30 people was arrested in Kempten and turned state witness providing testimony for the arrest of 50 Mafia members in Germany.
January 14, 2005: The fashion designer Rudolph Moshammer was found murdered in his house. One day later the murderer was arrested through a DNA analysis match and sentenced to life imprisonment.


== See also ==
Bavarian Border Police
Landespolizei
Polizeipräsidium München
Joseph Ratzinger, Sr. - Bavarian policeman


== References ==


== External links ==
Polizei.de (German)
Bavarian Police homepage (German)