Bologna Centrale is a railway station in Bologna, Italy. It is located at the southern end of the Milan-Bologna high-speed line, which opened on 13 December 2008 and the northern end of three lines between Bologna and Florence: the original, oldest Bologna-Florence line through Porretta Terme and Pistoia; the Bologna–Florence Direttissima through Prato, which opened on 22 April 1934; the Bologna-Florence high-speed line, which opened to traffic on 13 December 2009.
Bologna Centrale is the fifth busiest station in Italy with an annual ridership of 58 million. In terms of train movements, this station takes the joint first place with Rome Termini station.


== Station ==
There are two levels of railway tracks within the station complex: Bologna Centrale and Bologna Centrale (AV)
The central part of Bologna Centrale contains through tracks for high-speed trains (except Frecciarossa trains which travel only on the Milan-Bologna high-speed line), intercity and regional trains.
In addition, there are two groups of side tracks: the western side has six tracks for regional trains from Milan or Verona (with Bologna Centrale as a terminus) and the eastern side has six tracks for regional trains from Prato, Ancona and Pescara (with Bologna Centrale as a terminus).
Bologna Central (AV) has 4 underground platforms (16 to 19) for Frecciarossa or Frecciargento trains travelling between Milan and Florence. The underground tracks then connect to the Bologna-Florence high-speed line in tunnels. Frecciarossa trains to and from Padova and Venice instead stop at the station's through tracks. This high-speed station is connected by a series of walkway and elevators to the central part. Walking time is approximately 10 minutes.


== Train services ==
The following services call at the station (incomplete):
Domestic (High-speed) AV Station
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciarossa) Turin-Salerno: Turin - Milan - Bologna - Florence - Rome - Naples - Salerno
High-speed train (Italo) Turin-Salerno: Turin (Porta Susa) - Milan (Porto Garibaldi) - Bologna - Florence - Rome (Tiburtina) - Naples - Salerno
High-speed train (Italo) Venice-Salerno: Venice - Padua - Bologna - Florence - Rome (Tiburtina) - Naples - Salerno
Domestic (High-speed)
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciarossa) Venice-Naples: Venice - Padua - (Ferrara) - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome - Naples
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciarossa) Venice-Rome/Rome Airport: Venice - Padua - (Ferrara) - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome - Rome-Fiumicino 'Leonardo da Vinci' Airport
High-speed train (Italo) Turin-Ancona: Turin (Porta Susa) - Milan (Porto Garibaldi) - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona
High speed train (Trenitalia Frecciarossa) Milan-Bari: Milan - Bologna - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia – Bari
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciargento) Bolzano/Bozen-Rome: Bolzano/Bozen - Trento/Trient - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciargento) Brescia-Rome: Brescia - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciabianca) Milan-Lecce: Milan - Parma - Modena - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Brindisi - Lecce
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciabianca) Milan-Bari/Taranto: Milan - Parma - Modena - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Taranto
High-speed train (Trenitalia Frecciabianca) Venice-Lecce: Venice - Padua - Verona - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Brindisi - Lecce
Domestic
Night train (Trenitalia Intercity Notte) Trieste/Triest-Rome: Trieste/Triest - Venice - Padua - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome
Night train (Trenitalia Intercity Notte) Milan-Lecce: Milan - Parma - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - (Taranto) - Brindisi - Lecce
Night train (Trenitalia Intercity Notte) Turin-Lecce: Turin - Alessandria - Bolgona - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Brindisi - Lecce
Night train (Trenitalia Intercity Notte) Turin-Reggio di Calabria: Turin - Milan - Bologna - Florence - Rome - Naples - Salerno - Lamezia Terme - Reggio di Calabria
Night train (Trenitalia Intercity Notte) Bolzano/Bozen-Rome: Bolzano/Bozen - Trento/Trient - Verona - Bologna - Florence - Rome
Intercity train (Trenitalia Intercity) Milan-Lecce: Milan - Parma - Modena - Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Brindisi - Lecce
Intercity train (Trenitalia Intercity) Milan-Naples: Milan - Parma - Modena - Bologna - Prato - Florence - Arezzo - Rome - Latina - Naples
Intercity train (Trenitalia Intercity) Trieste/Triest-Rome: Trieste/Triest - Venice - Padua - Ferrara - Bologna - Prato - Florence - Arezzo - Rome
Intercity train (Trenitalia Intercity) Bologna-Lecce: Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Brindisi - Lecce
Intercity train (Trenitalia Intercity) Bologna-Bari/Taranto: Bologna - Rimini - Ancona - Pescara - Foggia - Bari - Taranto
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna-Venice: Bologna - Ferrara - Rovigo - Padua - Venice
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna-Voghera: Voghera - Piacenza - Parma - Modena - Bologna
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional Express) Piacenza-Ancona: (Milan) - Piacenza - Parma - Reggio Emilia - Modena - Bologna - Forli - Rimini - Ancona
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna-Brennero/Brenner: Bologna - Mirandola - Poggio Rusco - Ostiglia - Nogara - Isola della Scala - Verona - Ala/Ahl-am-Etsch - Rovereto/Rofreit - Trento/Trient - Mezzocorona/Kronmetz - Ora/Auer - Bolzano/Bozen - Ponte Gardena/Waidbruck - Chiusa/Klausen - Bressanone/Brixen - Fortezza/Franzensfeste - Vipiteno/Sterzing - Brennero/Brenner
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna-Prato: Bologna - Prato
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna-Porretta Terme: Bologna - Borgonuovo - Porretta Terme
Regional train (Trenitalia Regional) Bologna/Modena-Mantua: (Bologna) - Modena - Suzzara - Mantua
Cross-border
(A for Austria, D for Germany, F for France, GB for Great Britain)
Intercity train (ÖBB EuroCity) Munich-Verona/Bologna: Bologna - Verona - Rovereto/Rofreit - Trento/Trient - Bolzano/Bozen - Bressanone/Brixen - Fortezza/Franzensfeste - Brennero/Brenner - Innsbruck(A) - Jenbach(A) - Kufstein(A) - Munich(D)
Night train (DB CityNightLine) Rome/Milan-Munich: (Rome) - (Florence) - (Bologna) - Verona - Trento/Trient - Bolzano/Bozen - Innsbruck(A) - Jenbach(A) - Kufstein(A) - Munich(D)
Night train (ÖBB EuroNight) Rome/Milan-Vienna: (Rome) - (Livorno) - Florence - Bologna - Verona - Padua - Venice - Villach(A) - Klagenfurt(A) - Vienna(A)
Tourist train (Venice-Simplon Orient Express) Rome-London: Rome - Florence - Bologna - Verona - Innsbruck(A) - Paris (East)(F) - London(GB)


== History ==
The first Bologna Centrale station was constructed in 1859; however, there are sketchy and unclear testimonies regarding its history. A new station was built twelve years later on the same grounds.
The modern station was designed and built by architect Gaetano Ratti, who was trained in the local Clementine Academy. Inspired by the neoclassical style, the station's distinctive 15th century façade opens in nine entrance doors. The main passenger building is reminiscent of renaissance Florentine architecture. Until the 1940s, it was topped by a clock tower with marble pillars, but the tower was damaged by allied bombings in the Second World War and not rebuilt.
The original design called for a rectangular shaped, two-faced building, with a marble external façade and a steel internal one. Subsequent extension works, such as the 1926 building of the westbound platforms, shaped the station into the “L” form, typical of expanded transit stations. The introduction of new platforms at the eastern half in 1934 brought another change to the station's configuration.


=== 1980 terrorist bombing ===

On 2 August 1980 at 10.25 am, an improvised explosive device (IED) made with 20 kilograms of a TNT mixture was detonated inside Bologna's main railway station. The IED was contained in a suitcase, which was placed near the wall inside a waiting lobby. The explosion killed 85 people and injured more than 200. The wing of the station in which the bomb was detonated has been reconstructed but, as a testimony to the victims of the attack, the original pavement was maintained as well as a deep crack in the main wall. Moreover, the station main clock is forever stopped at the exact time of the explosion. The attack is also known in Italy as the Strage di Bologna, the Bologna massacre.
The Italian government immediately accused the Italian neo-fascist militant groups for the attack; however this was denied by the group, and no one ever claimed responsibility. After 15 years, official investigation has determined that the attack was carried out by a small neo-fascist group, call Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari. Many conspiracy theories regarding this event have been entertained, including a link between this act of terrorism and the Aerolinee Itavia Flight 870 disaster.


=== Present ===

Today, Bologna Central Station is the fifth-busiest in Italy in terms of passenger movements (about 58 million passengers per year). It is, however, one of the busiest when measured by train traffic, being tied with Rome Termini Station for the number of trains per day (about 800) being one of the main railway junctions in Italy.
A new three-level railway station, called the New Bologna Centrale Station, for high-speed trains, 642 metres long and 56 metres wide, is being built under the current station to a design by Arata Isozaki and Andrea Maffei, with parking at 7 metres below the surface, a shopping arcade at 15 m below and four high-speed train platforms at 23 m below. In July 2008 Andrea Maffei Architects, Arata Isozaki & Associates, Ove Arup & Partners and M + T & Partners won a competition to design the station. The underground platforms were opened for revenue service on 9 June 2013. The passenger drop-off facilities will be provided in a later phase. Together with the reinstatement of four surface tracks removed to facilitate construction, the project is due to be completed by 2016. The expected at design phase cost was €340 million.


== See also ==

History of rail transport in Italy
List of railway stations in Emilia-Romagna
Rail transport in Italy
Railway stations in Italy
11 March 2004 Madrid attacks
List of terrorist incidents
Bologna metropolitan railway service


== References ==


== External links ==
Bologna Central Station