Corruption in South Africa includes the private use of public resources, bribery and improper favouritism. The 2012 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index assigned South Africa an index of 4.3, ranking South Africa 69th out of 176 countries (tied with Brazil and Macedonia). (/ access to parliament 2004 }]
South Africa has a robust anti-corruption framework, but laws are inadequately enforced. Two forms of corruption are particularly prevalent in South Africa; tenderpreneurism and BEE fronting.


== Tenderpreneurism ==

Tenderpreneur is a term that describes individuals who enrich themselves through corrupting the awarding of government tender contracts, mostly based on personal connections and corrupt relationships - although outright bribery might also take place - and sometimes involving an elected or politically appointed official (or his or her family members) holding simultaneous business interests. This is often accompanied by overcharging and shoddy workmanship.


== BEE Fronting ==
BEE-fronting is an abuse of the rules governing Black Economic Empowerment (BEE), where qualifying persons are given a seat on the Board of Directors of a company while having no decision-making power in the company, in order to qualify the company for government contracts in terms of BEE.
Related to this is Cadre deployment and employment, which is an official ANC policy.


== Anti-corruption initiatives ==
Government initiatives against corruption are coordinated by the Department of Public Service and Administration.
The Public Protector also plays a role in fighting corruption.


== Notable incidents of fraud and corruption ==
The South African Arms Deal, finalised in 1999, became mostly known for the bribery that was used to gain the contracts. The Schabir Shaik trial arose partly from this scandal.
The Travelgate scandal, in which 40 members of parliament were found to have illegally used parliamentary travel vouchers worth R18 million for personal use.
The Goodwood police station commander, Siphiwu Hewana, was found guilty of attempting to defeat the ends of justice for tampering with the docket for convicted fraudster Tony Yengeni's arrest for drunken driving in 2007.
Former National Police Commissioner and ex-President of Interpol, Jackie Selebi, was convicted on corruption charges in July 2010, for receiving (at least) R120 000 from alleged crime-syndicate boss, Glenn Agliotti.


== References ==


== External links ==
South Africa Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal
Transparency International
National Anti-Corruption Forum
The Fight Against Corruption (organisation)