The Guard Jaeger Regiment (Finnish: Kaartin Jääkärirykmentti, Swedish: Gardesjägarregementet) is a Finnish Army unit located in Santahamina, an island district of Helsinki. The regiment trains Guard jaegers for fighting military operations in urban terrain (MOUT). The primary function of wartime units formed from the reservists trained by the regiment would be the defence of the capital Helsinki.
The commander of the Guard Jaeger Regiment is a Brigadier General even though this is normally a Colonel billet. This is due to other administrative functions the command holds in the region.


== OrganisationEdit ==
The commander of the regiment commands the following units:
Command
Personnel division
Training division
Logistics Center
Operative division
Helsinki Guard

Guard Battalion (KAARTP)
Military Police Company (SPOLK)
2nd Jaeger Company (2. JK)
Transport Company (KULJK)

Uusimaa Jaeger Battalion (UUDJP)
1st Jaeger Company (1. JK)
Support Company (TUKIK)

Sports School
Recon Company
Coaching center

Additionally the assistant commander commands the following functions
Helsinki Regional Office
The Guards Band
The primary function of the regiment is to train all wartime units from the conscripts serving in the regiment, specializing in the production of FIBUA-trained units. In addition, the regiment is the ceremonial unit of the Finnish Defence Forces, responsible for the Guard of Honour of the President of Finland. The Guards Band is similarly the representative band of the Defence Forces. As the largest unit located in the Garrison of Helsinki, the regiment is responsible for almost all the supplies of the troops and headquarters located in the capital region.
The conscripts of the regiment arrive mostly from the capital region and surrounding region of Uusimaa. In addition, the regiment is one of the most usual placements for the expatriate Finns and recently naturalized immigrants. The conscripts serving in special duties at the Defence Staff are also formally part of the regiment.


== HistoryEdit ==
The Guard Jaeger Regiment are the traditions of historical units that include the 3rd Finnish Sharpshooter battalion (Finnish: Tarkk’ampujapataljoona, Swedish: Skarpskyttebataljon), which had from the year 1830 Young Guard and from the year 1878 onwards Old Guard status in the Imperial Russian Army, the Jaegers of the Finnish Civil War and the 2nd Jaeger Battalion from the Second World War.
The traditions are kept alive by the Guard Jaeger Regiment Guild.


== HomepageEdit ==
Guard Jaeger Regiment's official homepage (Finnish)
Recruit's Guide to Guard Jaeger Regiment (English)


== ReferencesEdit ==