In law enforcement, a manhunt is an extensive and thorough search for a wanted and dangerous fugitive involving the use of police units, technology, and help from the public.
A manhunt is conducted when the suspect believed to be responsible for a serious crime is at large and is believed to be within a certain area. Any police units within reach of the area will then participate in the search, each covering parts of the area. The officers will, if possible, form a perimeter around the area, guarding any and all possible escape routes from the containment.
A manhunt may have one of the following outcomes:
The successful capture of the suspect within the area of the manhunt
Escape from the area by the suspect, followed by plans by other law enforcement agencies to search for the suspect elsewhere
The search being called off, if police determine the chances of catching the suspect are minimal
Also, if the fugitive resists using deadly force with the law enforcement officers, they are typically authorized to respond in kind.


== Fugitive manhunt agencies and organizations ==
AFOSI
INTERPOL
US Marshals Service
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FBI Hostage Rescue Team

Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) Teams
Texas Ranger Division of the Texas Department of Public Safety
The Academy Group
America's Most Wanted
Bounty hunter
British Security Service (MI5)
Greater London Metropolitan Police


== Public involvement ==
Sometimes, police departments conducting manhunts will solicit help from the public in locating the suspect. They will do this by broadcasting a description and other information on television, radio, and other public media, by going door to door and asking individuals if they have seen the suspect, and by placing wanted posters in public places.
When this happens, citizens are advised not to personally confront the suspect, but rather to call police and report their sightings.
One type of manhunt for which public participation is normally sought is an AMBER Alert. In an Amber Alert, the main purpose of the mission is to rescue the victim, ahead of the capture of the suspect. The public is usually given notice of an Amber Alert through additional forms of media, including highway overhead signs and text messaging.
If anyone is found aiding the suspect in any way, such as helping the suspect in hiding, or providing false information to the police about the suspect, may face legal consequences themselves, even being charged for the same crime as the suspect.


== Notable manhunts ==
Henry Every
Beltway sniper attacks and search for John Allen Muhammad and Lee Boyd Malvo
Bojinka plot (Abdul Hakim Murad, Wali Khan Amin Shah)
John Wilkes Booth
John Dillinger
Adolf Eichmann
The Green River Killer
Adam Yahiye Gadahn
Aribert Heim
Albert Johnson
Josef Mengele
Joseph Palczynski
Jack Unterweger
Robert Vesco
Zodiac Killer
1982 Chicago Tylenol murders
1993 shootings at CIA Headquarters
2001 anthrax attacks
Maurice Clemmons, see also Lakewood shootings
Barry Prudom
2010 Northumbria Police manhunt
Malcolm Naden
Christopher Jordan Dorner


=== Bombing suspects ===
Abu Ali al-Harithi
Centennial Olympic Park bombing (Eric Rudolph)
Ted Kaczynski (Unabomber)
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed
Search for Osama bin Laden
Oklahoma City bombing (Terry Nichols)
Pan Am Flight 103 bombing investigation
Pan Am Flight 73 (Zayd Hassan Abd Al-Latif Masud Al Safarini)
Pan Am Flight 103
TWA Flight 847
1993 World Trade Center bombing (Ramzi Yousef, Abdul Rahman Yasin)
Boston Marathon bombings (Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev)


=== Prison escapees ===
Mecklenburg Correctional Center escapees from Death Row
Charles Victor Thompson
Mas Selamat bin Kastari
Radovan Karadžić
Ratko Mladić
Goran Hadžić
Ante Gotovina
Aafia Siddiqui
Clark Rockefeller
Texas Seven
Clovis, New Mexico jail break
2010 Arizona prison escape
Operation Crevice
Operation Kratos
Project Coronado targeted members of the La Familia Michoacana drug cartel. On October 22, 2009, U.S. federal authorities announced the results of a four-year investigation into the operations of La Familia Michoacana in the United States dubbed Project Coronado. It was the largest U.S. raid ever against Mexican drug cartels operating in the U.S. In more than 19 different states, 303 individuals were taken into custody in a coordinated effort by local, state, and federal law enforcement over a two-day period.
Frank Morris, John Anglin, and Clarence Anglin, escapees of Alcatraz during 1962. They were likely to have been deceased.
The June 2015 Clinton Correctional Facility escape, in which two inmates, Richard Matt, 48- who had escaped before- and David Sweat, 35, both convicted of first-degree murder, escaped in an elaborate planned plot, using resources allegedly provided by a tailor shop prison employee, Joyce Mitchell, by drilling through their cell and into pipes leading to an external manhole outside the prison, near the Canadian border. As of June 29, 2015 they were both found and in custody.


== Famous fictional manhunts ==
The federal manhunt for George Foyet in the FBI crime drama Criminal Minds.
The national manhunt for John Thomas Macarill in the novella Paint it Black by Vincent McConnell.
The manhunt for an assassin known as The Jackal in Frederick Forsyth's novel The Day of the Jackal.
The cross-country manhunt for the Fox River 8 in the second season of Prison Break.
The statewide manhunt for Dr. Richard Kimble in The Fugitive.
The manhunt for Robert "Butch" Haynes (Kevin Costner) in Clint Eastwood's "A Perfect World" (1993).
The cross-country manhunt for Mark Schereden in U.S. Marshals.
The manhunt throughout California for Adrian Monk in the Monk episode "Mr. Monk Is On The Run."
The citywide manhunt for Henry Darius in the CSI: NY episode "Manhattan Manhunt."
The nationwide manhunt for Francis Dolarhyde in Manhunter (1986) and Red Dragon (2002).
The international manhunt for Dr. Hannibal Lector in both The Silence of the Lambs and Hannibal.
The manhunt for escaped prisoner/wizard Sirius Black in the Harry Potter book Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.
The cross-country manhunts for Benjamin Gates in the films National Treasure, after he stole the Declaration of Independence, and National Treasure: Book of Secrets, after he kidnapped the President of the United States.
The cross-country manhunt for notorious methamphetamine producer Heisenberg in the penultimate episodes of Breaking Bad.
The citywide manhunt for undercover DEA agent turned vigilante Max Payne in the video game Max Payne.


== See also ==
Interpol
Manhunt (military)
List of murderers by number of victims
War crime
Bounty hunter
Deadly force
Lone wolf (terrorism)
Mexican drug war


== References ==