Militia organizations in the United States are private organizations that include paramilitary or similar groups. These groups may refer to themselves as militia, unorganized militia, and constitutional militia. While groups such as the Posse Comitatus existed as early as the 1980s, the movement gained momentum after controversial standoffs with government agents in the early 1990s. By the mid-1990s, groups were active in all 50 US states, with membership estimated at between 20,000 and 60,000.


== History ==
Militia organizations in the United States are paramilitary out-growth of the independent survivalist, anti-tax and other causes in the patriot movement subculture in the United States. The formation of the militias was influenced by the historical precedent of existing paramilitary movements such as the Posse Comitatus and groups associated with protecting liberties of governed people.
Although the far-right Patriot movement had long been marginalized, cultural factors paved the way for the wide-scale growth of the libertarian or ideological militia movement. The catalysts came in the form of the FBI's 1992 shootout with Randy Weaver at Ruby Ridge, and the government's 1993 siege and eventual destruction of David Koresh and the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas. Historian Mark Pitcavage described the militia movement of the 1990s:

During the 1990s public attention to the militia movement began to grow. The Oklahoma City bombing on April 19, 1995, the second anniversary of the Waco fire, drew nationwide attention to the militia movement as Timothy McVeigh was erroneously associated with the Michigan Militia. This increased public scrutiny and law enforcement pressure, and brought in more recruits due to the heightened awareness of the movement.
In March 1996, agents of the FBI and other law enforcement organizations surrounded the 960-acre (390 ha) eastern Montana "Justus Township" compound of the Montana Freemen. The Freemen were a Sovereign Citizen group that included elements of the Christian Identity ideology, espoused common law legal theories, and rejected the legitimacy of the Federal Reserve. Montana legislator Carl Ohs mediated through the standoff. Both Randy Weaver (one of the besieged at Ruby Ridge) and Bo Gritz (a civilian negotiator at Ruby Ridge) had attempted to talk to the group but had given up in frustration, as did Colorado Senator Charlie Duke when he had attempted negotiations. A break finally came when far right leaders abandoned the group to their fate. The group surrendered peacefully after an 81-day standoff and 14 of the Freemen faced criminal charges relating to circulating millions of dollars in bogus checks and threatening the life of a federal judge. The peaceful resolution of this and other standoffs after Ruby Ridge and Waco have been credited by some to the creation of the Critical Incident Response Group (CIRG) in the U.S. Department of Justice in 1994.
Another incident occurred in Fort Davis, Texas a year later in March 1997 when a faction of the self-styled "Republic of Texas" militia group seized hostages. The Republic of Texas group believed that the annexation of Texas as a state in 1845 was illegal, that Texas should remain an independent nation, and that the legitimate government of Texas was the group's leadership. Joe and Margaret Ann Rowe were taken at gunpoint in retaliation for the arrest of member Robert J. Scheidt, who had been arrested on weapons charges. Leader Richard McLaren then declared that the group was in a state of war with the federal government. The property was then surrounded by the entire Jeff Davis County sheriff's department, state troopers, Texas Rangers, and agents of the FBI. McLaren's wife, Evelyn, convinced him to surrender peacefully after a week-long standoff. The McLarens and four other Republic of Texas members were sent to prison.
A 1999 US Department of Justice analysis of the potential militia threat at the Millennium conceded that the vast majority of militias were reactive (not proactive) and posed no threat. The Hutaree militia of Michigan was in fact prevented from killing a police officer and bombing his funeral by the FBI in cooperation with another local militia. In January 2000, the FBI Project Megiddo report stated:
Most militias engage in a variety of anti-government rhetoric. This discourse can range from the protesting of government policies to the advocating of violence and/or the overthrow of the federal government. The majority of militia groups are non-violent and only a small segment of the militias actually commit acts of violence to advance their political goals and beliefs. A number of militia leaders, such as Lynn Van Huizen of the Michigan Militia Corps Wolverines, have gone to some effort to actively rid their ranks of radical members who are inclined to carry out acts of violence and/or terrorism. Officials at the FBI Academy classify militia groups within four categories, ranging from moderate groups who do not engage in criminal activity to radical cells which commit violent acts of terrorism. It should be clearly stated that the FBI only focuses on radical elements of the militia movement capable and willing to commit violence against government, law enforcement, civilian, military and international targets.
By 2001, the militia movement seemed to be in decline, having peaked in 1996 with 858 groups. With the post-2007 global financial crisis and the election of Barack Obama to the United States presidency in 2008, militia activity has experienced a resurgence.
Militias' primary forms of outreach are gun shows, shortwave radio, newsletters, and the Internet.


== Ideology ==
The ideologies of militia groups can be described as political, constitutional, conspiratorial, or community based. Militia groups claim legitimacy based on colonial writings, particularly the Declaration of Independence; Article 1, section 8 and the 2nd Amendment of the United States Constitution; the Militia Act of 1792; Title 10, Section 311 of the United States Code; and the concept of an independent wing of the citizenry that enacts its own governmental beliefs. Watchdog groups such as the Anti-Defamation League and the Southern Poverty Law Center have portrayed militias as often holding racist ideologies. White supremacist views are held by prominent paramilitary militia groups such as the former Aryan Nations of northern Idaho, although counterexamples do exist. For example, The Gadsden Alabama Minutemen who exposed the racist "Good Ol' Boys Roundup" held by ATF agent Eugene Rightmyer had a black member, though this does not necessarily discredit racism claims in general, but rather racism against blacks in that specific militia. Robert Churchill noted a white supremacist "resistance wing" of the movement and a radical libertarian "constitutionalist wing" motivated by various, at times overlapping, concerns. The beliefs of the latter group center around opposition to the power of federal or local governments and limitations imposed by governing parties or erosions of liberties by governing parties.
Some militia groups see the power of government as a form of tyranny. Their beliefs focus on limited-government, on taxes, regulations, and gun control efforts as perceived threats to constitutional liberties. Many of their views are similar to those of the John Birch Society, tax protester movement, county supremacy movement, state sovereignty movement, and the states’ rights movement. Gun control (see Second Amendment) is considered unconstitutional, and a move toward fascism by the government. The controversial novel Unintended Consequences by John Ross in 1996 is an example of these beliefs. However, not all militias are armed or support the use of violence in political change. But some groups such as Georgia's F.E.A.R. conspired to commit various acts of terrorism (including assassination of the President). Ten members of the organization (which included some active duty military) have been convicted over the last three and half years for numerous crimes including three murders.
The ideologies most commonly associated with these militia groups and organizations are the Christian Patriot movement, the Constitutional militia movement, and opposition to the creation of an alleged one world government. Most militias are derived from a local populace who come to common belief, and so ideologies tend to differ by region. Most agree upon local regulation opposed to global, federal or state regulation.


== Active militia groups ==


== See also ==
Constitutional militia movement
The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the Lord
Posse Comitatus (organization)
Patriot movement
2011 Georgia terrorist plot
Minutemen (anti-Communist organization)
Michigan Militia
Minuteman Project
Mark Koernke
New World Order (conspiracy theory)
Oklahoma City bombing
Rainbow Farm
Second Amendment
Timothy McVeigh
List of organizations designated by the Southern Poverty Law Center as hate groups
List of Active Patriot Groups in the United States


=== Media ===
Betrayed (1988 film)
Bucksville (2011 fiim)
Lucky You (1997 novel)
Revolution (2012 TV series)
The Patriot (2000 film)
The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the Lord (1985 music album)
The Postman (1985 novel)
The Postman (1997 film)
The Turner Diaries (1978 novel)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Chermak, Steven M. (2002). Searching for a Demon: The Media Construction of the Militia Movement. UPNE. ISBN 9781555535414. OCLC 260103406. 
Crothers, Lane (2003). Rage on the Right: The American Militia Movement from Ruby Ridge to Homeland Security. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742525474. OCLC 50630498. 
Freilich, Joshua D. (2003). American Militias: State-Level Variations in Militia Activities. LFB Scholarly. ISBN 9781931202534. OCLC 501318483. 
Gallaher, Carolyn (2003). On the Fault Line: Race, Class, and the American Patriot Movement. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742519749. OCLC 845530800.