The Pakistan Rangers (Urdu: پاکستان رینجرز‎) are a Pakistani paramilitary force, under the direct control of the Ministry of the Interior of the Government of Pakistan. The Rangers are a border security force with the prime objective to guard, defend and secure borders in peace time as well war time provide and maintain security in war zones and areas of conflict as well as maintaining law and order which includes providing assistance to the police. Prior to 1995, the Pakistan Rangers were two separate forces: the Pakistan Rangers Punjab headquartered in Lahore, Punjab, and the Mehran Rangers headquartered in Karachi, Sindh. The two forces maintain their different uniforms and chains of command but work under same ordinances, such as the Pakistan Rangers Ordinance 1959.
Each evening, Pakistan Rangers stationed near Lahore, together with their counterparts in the Indian Border Security Force, participate in a flag lowering ceremony at Wagah.


== History ==
The origins and roots of Rangers dates back to 1942, when British government established a special unit as Sindh Police Rangers. After the independence of Pakistan in 1947, the protection of its eastern boundaries was allotted to particular forces, such as the Punjab Border Police Force, Bahawalpur State Police, Khairpur State Police and Sindh Rifles. Because the Rangers were neither correctly structured nor outfitted for a specific duty, in 1958, they were restructured and renamed as the West Pakistan Rangers. In 1972 Force was renamed from West Pakistan Rangers to Pakistan Rangers and given under the control of Federal Government (Ministry of Defence). In 1974, it became part of the Civil Armed Force under the Ministry of Interior. In late 1989, due to growing riots and worsening Law and Order situation in Sindh, a new force was raised for a strategic anti-dacoit operation in the interior of Sindh.The force operated under the name of Mehran Force and included the then existing Sindh Rangers, 3 Battalions of Pakistan Army (inc. SSG), Northern Scouts. It was this force constitution that eventually became the modern day Sindh Rangers. Mehran force was under the direct command of Director General Pakistan Rangers with its nucleus Headquarters in Karachi. Laterly Federal Government decided to substantially increase the strength of Rangers and the raising of separate Headquarters for Pakistan Rangers in Sindh. Consequently, 1st Jul 1995 Pakistan Rangers was bifurcated into two separate branches Pakistan Rangers (Punjab) and Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) Mehran Force and other Corps of Pakistan Rangers operated in the province of Sindh formed part of Pakistan Rangers (Sindh). Both branches area of responsibility is divided by provinces, Pakistan Rangers (Punjab) is primarily responsible for guarding 1300 km Eastern Border of Province of Punjab., Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) Defend Eastern Border with India in Sindh province, approximately 912 kilometres. The Force is governed by Rangers Ordinance 1959


== War performances ==
The Rangers had fought together with the Pakistan Army in several conflicts, namely the 1965 Indo-Pak war and 1971 Indo-Pakistan War. After the 1971 war, the force was federalized underneath the Ministry of Defence as the Pakistan Rangers, and, shortly in 1974, it was made a component of the Civil Armed Forces (CAF) under the Ministry of Interior. Pakistan Rangers guard the borders during peace and war. In 1995, the Mehran Force was merged into the Pakistan Rangers (Sindh). The Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) are credited for providing the Pakistan Army troops for Special Police Units in Kosovo and Haiti Peace mission every year.
These troops are entrusted with the task to provide protection and security to UN officials, provide operational and backup support, respond to threats to public order in coordination with the Kosovo administration, and assist humanitarian agencies. The Rangers also had participated in numerous special military operations along with Pakistan Army Special Forces branch in the past. Since their revitalization and re-building after the 1971 war, the Rangers have been involved in the numerous special military operations in Pakistan. The Rangers have also assisted the Army's Special Service Group in performing special operations. They first participated in 1973, when they, based on the intelligence reports, had successfully accompanied the SSGs to raid the Iraqi Embassy. In 1992, the Rangers were deployed to Karachi, and the Government of Sindh had used Rangers to keep peace in the city. The Rangers had also participated in Operation Blue Fox in 1992 along with the Army. Due to their close association with the Army, the Rangers also fought in Indo-Pakistani War of 1999 (Best known as Kargil War) deployed in Jammu and Kashmir. Despite the fact of it being a paramilitary force, the Government of Pakistan had recognized the Rangers as its one its special forces in 2004. The Rangers were among one of the special forces that participated in Operation Silence and accompanied Army Commandos in the operation. During the operation, the Rangers suffered a single casualty. In 2009, Rangers completed a special military operation in Lahore alongside the Special Service Group, when terrorists attacked the Manawan Police Academy. While it was led by the Pakistan Rangers, the operation, codenamed Lahore Police Academy Operation, ended with eight militant deaths with one captured. The same year, the Government of Pakistan deployed the Rangers to secure the outskirts of Islamabad when Taliban forces had taken over the Buner, Lower Dir, Swat and Shangla districts. Its members also participated in Operation Black Thunderstorm while securing the capital.


== Leadership ==
Pakistan Rangers is a paramilitary internal security force which comes under control of Federal Interior Ministry for Internal Security duties and work under umbrella of Corps V in Sindh and IV Corps in Punjab for duties in war zones and borders. Pakistan Rangers are divided into two separate branches: Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) and Pakistan Rangers (Punjab). Each branch is headed by a Director General appointed by the Pakistan Army after the clearance from the Chief of Army Staff. The Director General of the Pakistan Rangers currently holds the 2-star rank of Major-General. The current Director General of Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) is Major General Bilal Akbar, whereas Director General of Pakistan Rangers (Punjab) is Major General Farooq Berki, ().
The equivalent paramilitary force in Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is called the Frontier Corps (FC), each province with its own FC unit.


== Role ==

The Rangers are tasked with securing important monuments and guarding national assets in all major cities of Pakistan, including Islamabad. The Rangers have notably contributed towards maintaining law and order in Islamabad, Karachi, and Lahore in major crises. The Sindh Rangers consist of approximately 25,000 persons whereas almost half of the total force is deployed to Karachi. Due to the unstable situation in Pakistan, the Rangers have become extremely necessary to maintain law and order in all major cities.


== Organization ==

Like the police of Pakistan, the Rangers collectively function as provincial organizations independent of one another: The Sindh Rangers of the province of Sindh and the Punjab Rangers belonging to the province of Punjab.


== Rangers Anti-Terrorist (RAT) Wing ==
The Rangers Anti-Terrorist wing has been active since early 2004. It is same like army SSG .They are trained by Zarrar Company of Special Services Group (SSG) of the Pakistani Army. This company also participated in a recent exercise with U.K. Special Air Service operators and U.S. Army Rangers.


== Training and selection ==
The selection for rangers lasts 2–3 weeks. Both male and females can join the Rangers and an applicant must be between 18–25 years old for Punjab Rangers and 18 to 30 years old for Sindh Rangers. In order to apply for the Rangers, the applicant must passed F.A or F.Sc. (an equivalent to U.S. matriculation system) from a government-registered college. An applicant must hold Pakistani citizenship to join the Force. The Rangers can be deployed at any place either in Pakistan or abroad, according to the Rangers Act of 1959.
In spite of its role as paramilitary, the Rangers have been recognized by Government of Pakistan as one of its special forces.


== Appointments ==
Although the Pakistan Rangers are under the administration of the Interior ministry, key positions in the force, including Director-General of the Rangers, are headed by the members Pakistan Army. The Director General of the Pakistan Rangers is appointed by Pakistan Army's Generals Headquarters (GHQ). The majority of the officers are departmental officers who get promotion from the rank of Sub Inspector.
The rank structure of OR's, NCO's, JCO'S of the force is:-
Sepoy equal to Sepoy
Lance Naik equal to Lance Naik
Naik equal to Naik
Havaldar equal to Havaldar
Inspectors who get promoted from OR's Ranks are equal to Army JCO's:-
Ranker Sub Inspector, Inspector and Senior Ranger Inspector(SRI) Ranks are Equal to Naib Subedar, Subedar, Subedar Major. These ranker sub inspectors and inspectors can maximum reach to rank of Honorary DSR(Deputy Superintendent of Rangers which is equal to Army Honorary Captain).
Officer Ranks Structure:-
Direct Entry Probationary Sub Inspector and Inspector act as Army Second Lieutenant, and Lieutenant
Probationary Sub Inspector act as Subedar
Probationary Inspector act as Subedar Major
DSR (Deputy Superintendent of Rangers) equal to Army 2nd Lieutenant/Lieutenant and Captain
(Superintendent of Rangers) equal to Army Major
SSR (Senior Superintendent of Rangers) equal to Lieutenant Colonel
The ranks insignia are same as Pakistan Army except Sub Inspector and Inspector and then other Senior Ranks officers comes from Pakistan Army.
Each Company is commanded by a DSR (Deputy Superintendent Rangers). The Rangers also maintain a commando unit known as the "red commandos."


=== Flag lowering ceremony ===

Wagah, the only road border crossing between Pakistan and India, is the site of a flag lowering ceremony each evening. During the ceremony, Pakistani Rangers and their counterparts in the Indian Border Security Force carry out a drill in which they mirror each other's drill with high kicking steps, foot stamping and aggressive stares. Despite the outward display of aggression, the drill of both sides actually requires a high degree of co-operation.
The ceremony is attended by numerous spectators from both nations, as well as foreign tourists.


== Standard equipment ==
Automatic Rifles - 7.62 mm G3A3, 7.62 mm G3P4 Steyr AUGs and AK-47s
Machine Guns - 7.62 mm MG3
Sub-Machine Guns - 9 mm MP5A2 & MP5P4, 9 mm SMG-PK.
Pistols - Glock series, Sigma series TT pistol
Dragunov sniper rifle,PSG 1 (POF made)
RPG-7,Carl Gustav recoilless rifle,RPG-29
heavy machine gun - 12.7mm DShk
Bullet Proof Jackets - Various local and foreign types
Helmets - Modular Integrated Communications Helmet and indigenous helmets produced by AWC, Pakistan.
Bell 407 Jet ranger
APC - Talha, Saad, mohafiz
NVG goggles
Unknown Mortars
The formal headwear of the Rangers are somewhat similar to the ones worn by the Frontier Corps.


== Notable officers ==
Sub-Inspector Amarjeet Singh- The first Sikh Pakistani Officer of the Pakistan Rangers (Punjab).
SSR Malik Mukhtar- is the first officer of Pakistan Rangers who reach to rank of Senior Superintendent of Rangers which is equal to Army Lieutenant Colonel rank and he is doing duty as Wing Commander apart from this he is also known by his bravery specially in Karachi operation 1992


== Role of peace maintenance in Karachi ==

While kidnapping for ransom, extortion, threats to the business community were common in Karachi and industrialists were shifting their investment in Bangladesh and other countries, Chief Of Army Staff, Gen Ashfaq Pervaiz Kiyani took the notice of dire situation and on request of government and business community, the Rangers were deployed with special powers. The Rangers played a crucial role in maintaining peace and curbed law offenders without any discrimination and consideration of political affiliation. Business community in particular and masses in general took sight of relief and lauded the role of rangers in Sindh. Director General Rangers Sindh Lt.General Ejaz Chaudry visited Karachi Chamber of Commerce and Industry on 17 November 2011, on this occasion business community unanimously acclaimed the rangers role in maintaining peace in the city and demanded extension in its stay with special orders for another one year.


== Foreign peacekeeping missions for the United Nations ==

The Pakistan Rangers have also been involved in international peacekeeping operations for the United Nations (UN) in a number of countries such as Kosovo, Haiti and others.


== Notable operations, incidents and controversies ==
In 1973 the Punjab Rangers and Islamabad Police raided the Iraqi embassy in Islamabad after a discovery of illegal arms stored there.
More recently in 2011 the Punjab Rangers participated in the Lal Masjid Operation or Operation Silence.
Also in 2011 the Sindh Rangers were involved in a controversial shooting of an unarmed civilian which was caught on camera, broadcast by news networks throughout the country and sparked public outcry. All Rangers involved were prosecuted and the one who directly fired the shots was sentenced to death.
Sindh Rangers are also believed to be involved/semi-involved in Human rights abuses in Sindh.
In 2015 the Sindh Rangers in a controversial move raided the office of the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (previously Muhajir Qaumi Movement) in Karachi and detained members of the MQM party. Also caught in the raids were illegal guns and ammunition.


== See also ==
Frontier Corps


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Web Portal of Pakistan Rangers (Sindh)
Pakistan Rangers (Punjab)
Pakistan Defence