A paramilitary is a semi-militarized force whose organizational structure, training, subculture, and (often) function are similar to those of a professional military, and which is not included as part of a state's formal armed forces.
Under the law of war, a state may incorporate a paramilitary organization or armed agency (such as a national police, a private volunteer militia) into its combatant armed forces. The other parties to a conflict have to be notified thereof.
The use of the term paramilitary can be debated, but the general consensus being of a combatant force defined as neither military nor civilian. Organizations that have been described as paramilitary are as diverse as the Minutemen, youth groups (from scouting to the Pioneer movement), and even martially-themed boarding schools.
Though a paramilitary is not a military force, it is usually equivalent to a military's light infantry force in terms of intensity, firepower and organizational structure. A paramilitary may also commonly fall under the command of a military, even despite not being part of the military or play an assisting role for the military in times of war.


== Types ==
Depending on the standards used, "paramilitaries" may include:
Irregular military forces: militias, guerrillas, insurgents, and so forth
The auxiliary forces of a state's military: National Guard, Presidential Guard, Republican Guard
Some kinds of police forces, such as auxiliary police
Gendarmeries, such as Egyptian Central Security Forces and India's Central Reserve Police Force
Border guards, such as Russia's Border Guard Service
Security forces of ambiguous military status: Internal Troops, Railroad Guards or Railway troops
Militarized law enforcement personnel, such as SWAT teams in the United States
Foreign volunteers
Youth Military Cadet Organisations, such as Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps , Bangladesh National Cadet Corps
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the term is often restricted to the various armed groups involved in the Northern Ireland Troubles, such as the Ulster Volunteer Force or the Provisional Irish Republican Army.


=== Examples ===
The Iraqi Volunteer Forces
The Basij of Iran
The Blackshirts of Fascist Italy
The Bangladesh National Cadet Corps
The Central Intelligence Agency Special Activities Division in the United States
The Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit of the Philippines
The Department of Homeland Security-related agencies in the United States
The Emergency Response Team (RCMP) of Canada
The Fedayeen Saddam of Ba'athist Iraq
The GSG-9 of Germany
The Kuva-yi Milliye, Jandarma and Village Guards of Turkey
The Kaitseliit in Estonia
The Mobile Brigade of Indonesia
The National Task Force of Sweden
The Rangers of Pakistan
The Patriotic Guards of the Socialist Republic of Romania
The People's Armed Police of People's Republic of China
The Special Assault Team of Japan
The Special Task Force of Sri Lanka
The Spetsnaz of Russia
The State Defense Forces of individual states in the United States
The SWAT units of some law enforcement agencies in the United States
The SA, SS, SS-Gestapo, Waffen-SS and Hitler Youth of Nazi Germany
The Self-Defense Forces of Colombia
The Dignity Battalions of Panama
The Border Security Force of India
The Armed Police Force of Nepal
The Indo-Tibetan Border Police
The Tonton Macoute of Haiti in 1959
List of Serbian paramilitary formations
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh


== See also ==

Category:Rebel militia groups
Weimar paramilitary groups
Fourth-generation warfare
Private army
Death squad
Violent non-state actor


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Golkar, Saeid. (2012) Paramilitarization of the Economy: the Case of Iran's Basij Militia, Armed Forces & Society, Vol. 38, No. 4
Golkar, Saeid. (2012). Organization of the Oppressed or Organization for Oppressing: Analysing the Role of the Basij Militia of Iran. Politics, Religion & Ideology, Dec., 37–41. doi:10.1080/21567689.2012.725661


== External links ==
Human Rights Watch, Colombia and Military-Paramilitary Links
Global Security
List of Terrorist Groups
Mexico's Plan to Create a Paramilitary Force