The Pasukan Gerakan Khas (Abbreviation: PGK; Special Operations Command; SOCOM of Federal Police) is an elite high-profile counter-terrorism and special operations tactical unit of the Royal Malaysia Police (RMP). The PGK has two distinct subdivisions; VAT 69 (Very Able Trooper-69; Komando 69) and the Special Actions Unit (Malay: Unit Tindakan Khas; UTK).
The PGK are specially trained to intervene in high-risk events like hostage and barricade situations by hostile forces, especially terrorists and/or criminals. It was originally over 4,000 full-time operators. The actual size and organisation of the Directorate is classified. The PGK commonly functions as a high-level national tactical team in extremely sensitive or dangerous situations.


== History ==


=== VAT 69 ===
The VAT 69 (Very Able Troopers 69), also known as Task Force, Charlie Force and Special Project Team, is modelled on the British 22nd Special Air Service Regiment. It was founded in 1969 (hence the name – 69) as a small combat unit to counter the tactics and techniques of the communist terrorists. It is began when the Minister of Home Affairs and Internal Security, The Honorable Allahyarham (late) Tun Dr Ismail proposed the formation of a special force for fighting the communist insurgency in 1969.
In October 1969, 60 from 1,600 officers and men of the Police Field Force applied for VAT 69 training and qualified themselves for basic commando training. A group of drill instructors from SAS were sent to Fort Kemar, Perak to supervise the inaugural 69 Commando. Only 30 police officers managed to pass and they formed the first nucleus troop of 69 Commando Battalion.
In the 1970s, VAT 69 started its initial operations and was successfully deployed against the Malayan National Liberation Army during the Communist Insurgency War. As a result, a significant number of MNLA guerrillas were neutralised and large amounts of weapons and equipment were seized. VAT 69 also cooperated with the Senoi Praaq Regiment, an exclusively Orang Asli police light infantry unit, in operations against pro-Communist ASAL groups, which were composed of Orang Asli sympathisers of the Malayan Communists.
In 1977, three new squadrons were raised and trained by the New Zealand Special Air Service and a special course was also conducted to train their own instructors. This expansion programme was completed in 1980 and VAT 69 had fully equipped units with its own logistics department.


=== UTK ===
Unit Tindakan Khas (UTK) or Special Actions Unit is a secondary special forces unit of the RMP after VAT 69. This unit performs as a high-level national SWAT team and the unit's men also undertake undercover missions. Founded in 1 January 1975, they were also deployed in the first mission during the Japanese Red Army (Nihon Sekigun) hostage incident in 5 August 1975 when the terrorists held approximately 50 civilians including members of the US consulate and the Swedish chargé d'affaires as hostages within the AIA building housing several embassies in Kuala Lumpur, two years after the massacre of Israeli hostages in Munich, West Germany by the Palestinian Black September army group in 1973. The terrorists won the release of five imprisoned comrades and flew with them to Libya. Similarly, the UTK were also trained by the 22 SAS but they operate in a very different tactical atmosphere as compared by US Capitol Police SWAT units. In the selection phase, only twenty from more than a hundred police applicants are selected annually. UTK were also involved with the Grup Gerak Khas (Malaysian Army Special Forces) to manage security in the 1998 Commonwealth Games.


=== Merger ===
On 20 October 1997, the Royal Malaysia Police reorganised VAT 69 and UTK and merged them into one unit as Pasukan Gerakan Khas (PGK; Special Operations Command), launched by Prime Minister Dato' Seri Dr Mahathir Muhammad and Inspector General of Police Tan Sri Rahim Noor.
Although amalgamated into one directorate, they are essentially still two separate entities operating in two distinct operational environments.


== Functions ==
PGK roles are believed to include:
Intelligence collection in deep reconnaissance missions and warfare.
Special operations to support the RMP Special Branch in combating subversive organisations or terrorist activities.
Counter Terrorism operations inside Malaysian territory in conjunction with armed forces.
Law enforcement operations in dealing with armed criminals inside Malaysian territory.
Counter terrorism operations outside Malaysian territory; including Operation Astute in Timor Leste.
Search and rescue operations inside or outside Malaysian territory, such as aid operations in the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami in Acheh, Indonesia.
Protection of senior Malaysian dignitaries, ministers and VIPs.


== Identities ==
Maroon berets
A symbol of Pasukan Gerakan Khas Detachment A or Special Actions Unit (UTK).
Sand coloured berets
A symbol of Pasukan Gerakan Khas Detachment B or 69 Commandos (VAT 69).
Trimedia Parachute Wings
The recognised symbol of the PGK. It also identifies the abilities of parachutist, airborne unit and air assault operations.


=== Insignia ===
Motto
Warisan Darah Perwira (English : Heritage of the blood of Heroes)
Black
Black symbolises the highly secretive nature of VAT 69 operations.
Red
Red symbolises bravery.
Yellow
Yellow symbolises "Loyalty to King and Country" (Malay: Taat Setia kepada Raja dan Negara).
Javelin
Lembing, another traditional weapon used by Malay warriors.
Two pieces of the curved Kerambit dagger.
Arranged to form the number 69, signifying stealth and efficiency.


== Organisation ==

Previously separate entities, both the VAT 69 and the UTK were amalgamated into the PGK on 20 October 1997, when it was launched by the 5th Inspector General of Police, Tan Sri Rahim Noor. However, the VAT 69 and the UTK are still operationing as separate units. The UTK is now officially known as Pasukan Gerakan Khas Detachment A and VAT 69 has been deputised to Pasukan Gerakan Khas Detachment B.
Based at the Royal Malaysia Police Headquarters in Bukit Aman, Kuala Lumpur, the PGK is under the direct command of the RMP's Internal and Public Security (Malay: Keselamatan Dalam Negeri dan Ketenteraman Awam) Director. The unit commander holds the rank of Senior Assistant Commissioner (SAC) and is the Deputy Director of the Internal and Public Security Branch.
With the growing threat of terrorism since the 11 September attacks, this unit has increasingly adapted itself to conduct counter-terrorism duties. With the aim of creating teams that are capable of dealing with a broad range of operations (especially counter-terrorism operations), the PGK small patrol team consist of six to ten operatives led by officers ranked from Police Inspector to Superintendent of Police with different expertise such as an attack units, snipers, EOD experts, communications experts and field medics. The PGK has also forged closer relations with the special forces of the Malaysian Armed Forces, including the 10 Paratrooper Brigade, Grup Gerak Khas, PASKAL and PASKAU, so as to enable them to more effectively enforce security within Malaysia's borders.


== Roles ==

The UTK tactics and organisation is primarily influenced by the Germany GSG-9 and American Special Activities Division but with a difference; UTK operatives operate mostly in plain-clothes and also perform undercover missions. It has approximately 300 members, UTK is deployed in cases of hostage taking, kidnapping, terrorism and extortion. The group may also be used to secure locations, neutralise targets, track down fugitives and sometimes conduct sniper operations and escorting and protecting top leaders and VVIPs. 69 Commando operatives however are jungle warfare specialists given the 69 Commando's origins as a force established to fight the communist threats in 1969 and the insurgency years. Originally trained by the British SAS, 69 Commando conducts in land, sea and air special operation techniques with speciality in jungle warfare and deep reconnaissance missions, 69 Commando mission is to execute special operation in support of Police Special Branch fight against subversive organisation and terrorist activities, offensive operations using special weapons and tactics, anti-terrorism, counter-insurgency, hostage rescue, close protection and supporting the Malaysian Armed Forces special forces, Rapid Deployment Force or infantry force in any security measures. There are four infantry squadrons in 69 Commando with its own logistic unit, totalling around 1,900 members.
PGK snipers, technicians and explosive expertise regularly cross-train with foreign special forces including the Special Air Service Regiments of Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, the Royal Thai Border Patrol Police, the French GIGN, the German Federal Police Grenzschutzgruppe 9 (GSG-9), and a number of US services including the US Navy SEALs, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) and others. UTK members wear maroon berets while 69 Commando members wear the sand coloured beret given to them by their founding trainers, the 22nd SAS.
On 14 November 2006, for the first time in the history of PGK, the maroon and sand coloured berets were honoured as Royal Berets by Yang Dipertuan Agong Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin Syed Putera Jamalullail, the then King of Malaysia.


== Recruitment, selection and training ==

All members of the Malaysian police forces services with two years of service can join the PGKs. The three months training period includes thirteen weeks of basic training and nine weeks of advanced training. A primary selection period is as long as two days. Depending on the department's policy, officers generally have to serve a minimum tenure within the department before being able to apply for a specialist section such as PGK. This tenure requirement is based on the fact that PGK officers are still law enforcement officers and must have a thorough knowledge of department policies and procedures. To be eligible to join the PGK Special Forces, one must be younger than 30 years old and have a good health record.
Prospective trainees are expected to exceed the minimum requirements of the Physical Screening Test (PST), which requires that trainees must be able to:
Run 3.2 km in 11 minutes or less
Swim freestyle for at least 8–10 laps
Do at least 9–13 chin-ups
Do at least 30 sit-ups
Do at least 60 push-ups
Do at least 30 squat thrusts
In 69 Commando, it has a three phases included:
First Phase
Trainees will spend most of their time mastering patrol techniques.
Second Phase
In this phase, all trainees will learn skills and lessons such as tracking, communication, field medical and explosive. This also involves making booby traps, explosives and various demolition techniques.
Third Phase
Final movement test where the trainees are tested in all aspects of skills and lessons that they had learned. At the moment, special attention is given to trainees who show leadership potential.
To accomplish its varied mission profiles, the PGK ensures that its members are well trained in the required aspects of special operations. These include:-
Insertion Techniques
HALO/HAHO
Fast roping techniques
Helo casting
Abseiling
Combat diving
Combat Techniques
Close Quarters Combat – CQC
Counter-insurgency
Unconventional warfare
Sabotage
Close VIP protection
Vehicular assault
Unarmed combat
Knife combat
Marksmanship
Booby-trap defusal
Underwater demolitions )
Intelligence Gathering
Intelligence
Counterintelligence
Special reconnaissance
Long-range Combat Patrol
Task Oriented

Aircraft Hijackings
Car stops
Combat, Search and Rescue (CSAR)
Coordinate multi-location warrant service
Dignitary protection
Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD)
Foreign language
Fugitive tracking (in rural environments)
Hazmat Disposal
High risk arrests (armed and dangerous subjects)
Hostage rescue (HR)
K9 Handling
Operations in WMD environments
Site surveys for high visibility events
Specialized sniper operations
Stronghold assaults (structures requiring specialised breaching equipment that local law enforcement might not have access to)
Tubular assaults (aircraft, trains, buses, etc.)
The PGK is known to conduct joint training exercises and participate in exchange programs with Commonwealth special units such as the Australian SAS, British SAS, New Zealand SAS and Singapore Special Tactics and Rescue. The PGK routinely trains with neighbouring country tactical teams such as the Indonesian Mobile Brigade and Thailand Border Patrol Police. Occasionally the PGK trains with FBI Hostage Rescue Team, French GIGN and RAID, German GSG 9, Italian NOCS, Spanish G.E.O, US Delta Force, US Green Berets, US Army Special Operations Command Pacific Unit (SOCPAC) and other international units.
On 10 December 2003, the then Inspector General of Police, Tan Sri Mohd Bakri Bin Haji Omar, launched the training programme between the USSOCPAC and the 69th PGK at the General Operations Force Training Center in Ulu Kinta, Perak. The team of SOCPAC were to conduct joint exercise with the PGK, under codename Advance Vector Balance Mint for a duration of 2 weeks. Only 42 out of the 194 participants completed the inaugural programme.


== PGK equipment ==

PGK teams use equipment designed for a variety of specialist situations. The particular pieces of equipment vary from unit to unit, but there are some consistent trends in what they wear and use. Much of their equipment is indistinguishable from that supplied to the military, not least because much of it is military surplus


=== Weapons ===
As a special forces unit, the PGK is equipped with a wide variety of high class weapons and support equipment commonly associated with counter-terrorism operations, the most common weapons include submachine guns, assault rifles, shotguns, machineguns and sniper rifles.
Semi-automatic pistols are the most popular sidearms and the majority of the officers use various 9 mm pistols. Principal handguns include:
 USA: Colt 1911A1, .45 ACP
 Austria: Glock pistol series (especially the Glock 17, Glock 18, Glock 26, Glock 34), 9 mm
 Germany: Heckler & Koch USP series, 9 mm
  Switzerland: SIG Sauer P2022, 9 mm
 USA: STI Grandmaster, 9 mm
 USA: STI Tactical-5.0, 9 mm
 Germany: HK Mk23 Mod 0,. 45 ACP
Various shotguns used by PGK units include:
 Italy: Benelli M3 Super 90
 Italy: Franchi SPAS-12
 USA: Remington 870
 USA: Remington 1100
Common submachine guns used by all PGK teams include:
 Czech Republic: CZ Scorpion Evo 3, 9 mm
 Germany: Heckler & Koch MP5 series (especially the MP5A5, MP5-N, MP5K-A4 and MP5SD6), 9 mm
 Germany: HK UMP, 9 mm
 Germany: Heckler & Koch MP7A1 PDW, 4.6 mm
Common carbines include:
 USA: Colt M4A1 SOPMOD, 5.56 mm
 Belgium: FN SCAR-H, 7.62 mm
 Germany: HK 416 series (especially the D10RS and D14.5RS), 5.56 mm
 Austria: Steyr AUG-A3, 5.56 mm
 Philippines: Special Operations Assault Rifle, 5.56 mm
Common sniper rifles used are:
 UK: Accuracy International PM, .308 Win
 UK: Accuracy International AWSM, .338 LM
 USA: Barrett M82, 12.7 mm
 Germany: HK PSG-1A1, 7.62 mm
 USA: Remington 700P, 7.62 mm
The 69 Comandos used the common machine guns include:
 USA: M60 machine gun, 7.62 mm
Various grenade launchers used by PGK units include:
 USA: M79 grenade launcher, 40 mm
 USA: M203 grenade launcher, 40 mm
Less lethal weapons is:
 USA: Bean bag rounds
 USA: M84 Flashbang
 USA: Pepper spray
 USA: Pepper-spray projectile
 USA: Taser X26 (electroshock weapon)


==== Notes ====
1The Bean Bag shell is typically fired from a shotgun, and is used by police and military forces, mainly in the United States to disperse the type of riot which is not able to be controlled with tear gas weapon. When fired, the bean bag (or BB) made from rubber and plastic is expelled at around 70–90 meters/second; it spreads out in flight and distributes its impact over about 6 centimetres² of the target. It is designed to deliver a blow that will cause minimum long-term trauma and no penetration but will result in a muscle spasm or other reaction to briefly render a violent suspect immobile.


=== Tactical Vehicles ===

As a special operations unit, the PGK employs a number of specialised vehicles to accomplish its missions. These include the Commando V-150D and the GKN Sankey AT105 armoured personnel carriers equipped with M60s as assault vehicles in urban and jungle terrain as well as modified police MPV (Mobile Patrol Vehicles), vans, trucks, 4WD and buses for use as tactical vehicles. PGK also employs RHIB assault boats, jet-skis and Marine Subskimmer (DPV) in maritime missions and amphibious insertions.
For its airborne operations, PGK utilises the C-130 Hercules, Cessna 206G, Cessna 208 Caravan 1 and Pilatus Porter PC-6 aircraft as well as the E-Squirrel AS-355 F2/AS-355N helicopter.


=== Developments and Acquisitions ===
On 25 October 2007, the US Joint Interagency Task Force (JIATF) West funded RM2 million state-of-the-art shooting house for the VAT 69 Commando battalion was opened.


== List of Unit Commanders ==
Listed below are the unit commanders past & present.


== Killed in the line of duty ==


== Missions ==

Its first counter-terrorism mission, which is one of the most well-known and which established the unit's reputation as an elite unit, was an operation known as "Operasi Subuh"/"Operasi Khas 304" (Operations Dawn/Special Operation 304). It was carried out on 3 July 2000 against Al-Ma'unah terrorists who had stolen 94 M16 rifles, 2 Steyr AUG rifles, 4 General Purpose Machineguns (GPMG), 6 Light Machineguns (LMG), 5 M203 grenade launchers, 26 bayonet daggers and thousands of ammunition rounds from 2 control posts of the Rejimen Askar Wataniah (Territorial Army Regiment) camp in Kuala Rui, Perak and captured 2 police officers, one army special forces soldier and one villager as hostages and planned to commit treason against a democratically elected government.
In the dawn of 5 July 2000, police and military units created a distraction, while members of the PGK, accompanied by the 22nd Grup Gerak Khas led by Malaysian armed forces senior officer Lt. Gen. (R) Zaini Mohamad Said and 69th Commando PGK leader ASP Abd Razak Bin Mohd Yusof were sent to Sauk to negotiate with the Al-Ma'unah leader, Mohamed Amin Bin Mohamed Razali.
Amin, along with his comrades were persuaded to drop their arms and surrender to the security forces. Although most of the group initially surrendered, negotiations eventually broke down and a bloody gunfight ensued. In these incidents, 2 of the 4 hostages were killed before the group finally surrendered. The security forces team suffered two casualties – police Special Branch officer Detective Corporal R. Sanghadevan and Trooper Matthew anak Medan from 22nd GGK were tortured before they were killed and was buried by 2 other hostages, Sargeant (R) Mohd Shah Ahmad and civilian Jaafar Puteh, in the jungle before they were both rescued by security forces. Abdul Halim Ali @ Ahmad, a member of the militant group, was shot dead in the gunfighting and five others were injured, including two seriously. The other 22 were taken into police custody. Mohamed Amin, Zahit Muslim, Jemari Jusoh and Jamaludin Darus were later sentenced to death and the other 16 were sentenced to life imprisonment. 10 more comrades, Megat Mohamed Hanafi Ilias, Muhamad Nukhshah Bandi Che Mansor, Riduan Berahim, Azlan Abdul Ghani, Shahidi Ali and Khairul Anuar Mohamed Ariffin, were sentenced by the High Court to ten years in jail each after pleading guilty to an alternative charge under Section 122 for preparing to wage war against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong after they pleaded guilty to the lesser charge.


=== Publicly known missions ===

1970s: 69 Commandos led by ASP Zabri Bin Abd Hamid together with Indonesian Army KOSTRAD combating the PARAKU in Kalimantan jungles.
October 1985: Special Actions Unit (UTK) was involved in hostage rescue operations including one doctor and one medical assistant by six armed convicts led by Jimmy Chua in Pudu Jail, Kuala Lumpur. Six days later, hostages were successfully rescued, while Jimmy was captured and was sentenced to death.

29 June 1993: UTK stormed a hiding place of P. Kalimuthu or Bentong Kali at Medan Damasara, Selangor. In the shoot-out with the police, the Most-Wanted Criminal was successfully killed.
1994: One of the Philippine MNLF organisations, Rizal Aleh and his father escaped from Philippines and hid in a village of Sabah where he started piracy activities. 69 Commandos led by DSP Mohd Noor Bin Razak within operations code-named Ops Bamboo II was sent to Sabah to infiltrate him. Mohd Noor were shot by Rizal at his leg during struggled with him. Both was successfully captured and sentenced by the National Court after pleading guilty for his criminal in Sabah. Later, both Rizal and his father were sent back to the Philippines Government.
1998: The Pasukan Gerakan Khas and the Grup Gerak Khas were deployed to provide security and were on standby for hostage rescue, close protection and counter-terrorism duties during the 1998 Commonwealth Games held at National Stadium, Bukit Jalil, Kuala Lumpur on 11 to 21 September 1998.
20 September 1998: In the twilight hours, by orders from the then Prime Minister to the Inspector General of Police, Tan Sri Rahim Noor, 69th Commando PGK operatives led by Inspector Mazlan arrested the ex-Deputy Prime Minister Dato' Sri Anwar Ibrahim in his home 18 days after his ejection from the Cabinet, for inciting anti-Mahathir reforms in Kuala Lumpur. He was initially arrested under the Internal Security Act and was subsequently charged with, and convicted of, corruption and sodomy. 6 years later in 2004, when he was serving his jail sentence for sodomy after completing his sentence for corruption, he was released when his sodomy conviction was overturned by the Federal Court in the case of Dato’ Seri Anwar b. Ibrahim & Sukma Darmawan Sasmitaat Madja Lwn. Pendakwa Raya.
5 July 2000: The Al-Ma'unah group stole crates of military firearms and planned to commit treason against a democratically elected government. The 69 Commandos PGK and the 22nd GGK stormed the group camp at Sauk, Malaysia and rescued 2 hostages while 2 other hostages were killed.
18 January 2000: Involved in an operation to arrest the Gang Steyr, the armed criminal group which was led by ex-special forces personnel named Mohd Hizan Bin Jaafar, along with 5 men after they robbed a bank in Sri Serdang Road, Selangor. During the operation, two criminals including Mohd Hizan and Abu Hasan were killed at Melayu Majidee Village and two more were killed in a shoot-out with the police at Tol Plaza Kempas, Johor Bahru and recovered 4 Steyr AUG rifles, Smith & Wesson .22 handgun, one Remington shotgun, 85 rounds of 5.56 mm bullets, 3 rounds .22 bullets, a few bullet shells and found RM291,000. The police also launched an operation to hunt two other members of the gang.
2001: Arrested two Jemaah Islamiyah suspect terrorists which in the list of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), Yazid Sufaat and Suhaimi Mokhtar and detained at the Kamunting Detention Center under the Internal Security Act (ISA) 1960 related to involved with the activities of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) and al-Qaeda other 9/11 attacks and Bali bombings.
2002: Arrested six Jemaah Islamiyah suspect terrorists, Dr Abdullah Daud, Shamsuddin Sulaiman, Mat Shah Mohd Satray, Abdul Murad Sudin, Zaini Zakaria and Zainun Rashid.
12 September 2002: Ahmad Bin Mohd Arshad or Mat Komando, 37, the leader of Gang 13, the then No.1 on the Malaysian Most-Wanted-Criminal list for 52 armed robberies involving about RM2.5 million, armed assault and illegal possession of firearms (among others) was known to be hiding in a Kampung Hujung Keton, the village in the state of Kedah on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula. Armed with intelligence gathered from surveillance and villagers, 10 police officers from 69 Commando anti-terror police, supported by the GOF paramilitary police, cordoned off the area and stormed a hut in the village for the take down. Sensing the presence of law enforcement officials in dawn 12, 6 September.30 am, Mat Komando opened fire and in the ensuing shoot-out, was shot in the head and left ribs and was killed. The police seized a Colt .45 pistol with three rounds of ammunitions and a S&W Model 617 .22 revolver with two rounds of ammunitions, two bullet shells from the deceased criminal. The then Malaysian Inspector General of Police, Tan Sri Norian Mai (Retired), said that Mat Komando was the fourth member of the Gang 13 members to be killed in shoot-outs against police while the remaining nine members had been arrested.

27 September 2002: Hunted downed Gang M16, the then Most-Wanted-Criminals of Malaysia for armed robbery at the Bank of Tokyo in 1985, 16 other armed robberies in jewellery shops and pawn shops, carting away loot which amounted to RM21.28 million. It was reported that all the members of this group were Chinese and the mastermind of this group was one Elvis Keh Jiang Long a.k.a. Ah Po, the ex-Singaporean National Service personnel ( Singaporean Army), was an expert in various firearms and he was responsible for training the group for the robberies. During the gunfighting with the UTK in Batu 5, Jalan Seremban-Mantin, near the Galla Recreational Park, Mantin, Negeri Sembilan, two of the Gang M16 members, identified as Sunny Chai @ Sum Wing Chang and his righthand man, known as Hew Yau, were shot dead. Another gang member, Chang Kew Yin, managed to escape. One UTK officer was wounded. Security forces recovered an M16 rifle with two rounds of ammunition, a Colt semi-automatic handgun with 16 rounds of ammunition, a Smith & Wesson revolver and three ski-masks from the suspects' vehicles. At 28, 2 December am, Chang was gunned down in the ensuing shootout at Jalan Keris, Taman Sri Tebrau, Johor Bahru and security forces recovered a China-made Norinco pistol with three rounds of ammunition from Chang's body. Federal CID Director, Datuk Salleh Mat Som (late), said the police was always hunting for the Gang M16 members who were still at large, including sending their officers to Singapore and Thailand to track Keh down and also requested the assistance of the Australian police to locate another gang member, Hew Soon Loong @ Hong Kong Chai, who was believed to have fled to the country.
Participated in hostage rescue operations against Abu Sayyaf in Sipadan Island (Pulau Sipadan) and Ligitan Island (Pulau Ligitan), Sabah with support from GOF, the Malaysian Armed Forces and Philippine Armed Forces.
2003: Arrested six Jemaah Islamiyah suspect terrorists, Mohd Khaider Kadran (JI leader), Wan Amin Bin Wan Hamat, Sulaiman Suramin, Sufian Salih, Ahmad Muaz Bin Al Bakry and Hasim Talib.
16 October 2003/17 October 2003: Involved in VVIP protection of the Islamic leaders during the 10th Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in Putrajaya.
2004: Arrested three Indonesian National Jemaah Islamiyah suspect terrorists, Zakaria Bin Samad, Ahmad Zakaria and Terhamid Bin Dahalan.
16 December 2004: Participated in the search and rescue mission for the lost Indonesian BRIMOB, in which 700 personnels from the POLRI special operations force units went missing in Acheh after the tsunami incident.
2004: Arrested three Indonesian National Jemaah Islamiyah suspect terrorists, Mahfudi Saifuddin, Mulyadi and Arifin related to involved with the activities of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) other Bali bombings in 2004.
2005: Undertook VVIP escort missions to protect ex-Prime Minister Tun Dr Mahathir Muhammad when he visited Johor.
23 August 2005: Five officers and 32 members of the 69 Commandos of PGK counter-terrorist operatives flown to Kukup, Pontian for the intercept operations of a ship seized the Panama-registered 567-tonne vessel MV Natris which was renamed MV Paulijing, laden with soy beans and vinegar, believed to run off Batam waters, Indonesia. The ship was detected by the Marine Operations Force in the Malacca Straits after reported missing in 2003. This operation was named Operation MV Paulijing. The operation also involves members of the SWAT units of the Marine Operations Force which resulting arrested 20 Chinese crews including the captain when they refused to heed to the order by the police authorities.
2006: Deployed as part of the United Nations (U.N.) INTERFET to support the Operation Astute. It consisted of Malaysian U.N. 10 Paratrooper Brigade, Grup Gerak Khas, Australian and New Zealand U.N Armed Forces in Timor Leste.
2007: Arrested four alleged Jemaah Islamiyah involvements, Zulkifli Marzuki, Mohd Nasir Ismail, Ahmad Kamil Hanafiah and Muhd Amir Hanafiah.
July 2007: Deployed in a search and rescue operation after a Sikorsy S61 Nuri helicopter of the RMAF went down along with a crew of six near Genting Sempah, Genting Highlands. The SAR team, which consisted of the US Navy Air Fleet from USS Jarret, 10 Paratrooper Brigade, the 22nd GGK, PASKAU, the police General Operations Force Senoi Praaq, Police Air Wing, Fire and Rescue Department, Forestry Department rangers, Civil Defense Department (JPA3) and villagers, located the wreckage of the chopper on 17 July 1324hrs with its rotor blades detached. The bodies of all crew members were found in the cabin of the stricken aircraft.

16 July 2008: Arrested the PKR de facto leader, Dato' Seri Anwar Ibrahim in front of his house at Bukit Segambut in the twillight hours, similar to what happened in 1998, for investigations under Section 377C of the Penal Code for alleged "carnal intercourse against the order of nature" with his former aide, Mohd Saiful Bukhari Azlan. However, CID director Commissioner Dato' Mohd Bakri Zinin said that the arrest was not carried out by the UTK, but by the Bukit Aman's Serious Crimes Division (possibly by the Unit Tindakan Cepat, UTC).

2009: In February 2008, a Singaporean Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) leader, Mas Selamat Kastari escaped from Whitley Detention Center, the tightest detention centre in Singapore. A few months later, he was found to be hiding at a village house in Kampung Tawakal, Skudai, 40 km from Johor Bahru. Following intelligence sharing with the police forces of Indonesia and Singapore and tidying of tactical planning, in the dawn of 1 April 2009 at 06:00 am, a team from UTK counter-terrorist unit was deployed to assist police Special Branch agents recapture the militant leader in the village house. Both the UTK and Special Branch members stormed each of the perimeter of that house while Mas Selamat was sound asleep. However, according to a witness, Mohd Saat Marjo, 57, a villager who lived opposite the fugitive’s home, about 30 masked commandos armed with automatic weapons together with plainclothes Special Branch agents broke through two doors and rushed into the house when Mat Selamat refused to come out and surrender when ordered by the police. The raid and inclusion by the UTK and Special Branch was very organised, giving Mas Selamat no chance to escape. He was handcuffed with his face covered in a dark blue checked cloth before he was swiftly bundled into a police vehicle and taken away. Other JI members, Abdul Matin Anol Rahmat and Johar Hassan, were also arrested together, and the police also seized documents and other paraphernalia that allegedly revealed their planned operation as well as combed the area with bomb detectors to ensure that the house was free of explosives. However, the UTK's involvement in that operation was not highlighted in the media due to the top secret nature of the operations. The arrest was attributed to the Special Branch.
2010: Intercepted the Sultan of Kelantan's motorcade (escorts) 30m outside of the Kelantan Royal Palace as they were heading for the Sultan Ismail Petra Airport to depart for Singapore pending further treatment at Mount Elizabeth Hospital. The team then brought the Sultan, himself not willingly, to the nearby hospital (HUSM) somewhere 200m from the Palace.
8 July 2011: Deployed in a hostage rescue mission in which a preschool located at Sungai Abong Park, Sakeh Street near Muar in southern Johore state was taken by a 40-year-old man. The man named Loi Hui Chung, who was suspected to be a drug addict and mentally-deranged, was armed with a hammer and a machete and he threatened to kill the hostages if his demand was not met. The siege ended at exactly 1541 GMT after UTK members stormed the building with tear gas and shot the suspect. He was in a critical condition with a head wound and died later at the Sultanah Fatimah Specialist Hospital at 2115 GMT.
7 February 2013: Arrested a former Internal Security Act (ISA) detainee Yazid Sufaat and two of his friends, including a women, in the Klang Valley, Selangor in separate operations. The unit nabbed Yazid and Mohd Hilmi Hasim at a canteen in the Jalan Duta court complex whilst the woman, Halimah Hussin, was picked up from her house in Kajang. They became the first few to be arrested under the new Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012 (SOSMA) which replaced the ISA. They were alleged to have been promoting terrorism, and had allegedly been linked to terrorist activities in Syria.
2013: Deployed in Lahad Datu, Sabah during the Lahad Datu conflict. The 69 Commando members were involved in hunting down a terrorist group, numbering approximately 200+ in strength, from the self-styled "Royal Security Forces of the Sultanate of Sulu and North Borneo," while UTK members were deployed in urban and populated areas to defend them. The commandos were the main assault team during the early stage of the conflict. Two officers were gunned down and three more wounded in an unexpected "white flag" ambush by the Sulu terrorists, while 12 of the terrorists were shot to death in retaliation and three other terrorists were fatally wounded.
2 March 2013: Officers and members of the 69 Commandos who went deploy to Lahad Datu as reinforcements rescued police officers who were trapped in an ambush by less than ten Sulu terrorists in Kampung Seri Jaya Siminul, Semporna. The terrorists, armed with AK-47 and M16 rifles, had ambushed the officers during a surveillance operation. In the ambush, six officers were downed, while six terrorists also killed after the officers launched the counter-attack.
19 May 2015: A team of roughly 300 operators from the 69 Commandos were deployed to the Malaysia-Thailand border to search and curb the human trafficking activities in the region. 


== See also ==


== Further reading ==
Navaratnam, A. (2001). The Spear and the Kerambit: The Exploits of VAT 69, Malaysia's Elite Fighting Force, 1968–1989. Kuala Lumpur: Utusan Publications and Distributions. ISBN 967-61-1196-1. 


== References ==


== External links ==
Berita Harian Online: VAT 69 digeruni komunis (In Malay language).