The politics of the Western Cape are more complex than in most other provinces of South Africa, because, unlike the other provinces, the African National Congress (ANC) does not dominate the political landscape.
In the election of 2004, no party achieved an absolute majority in the province, with the ANC having a plurality of 45% of the votes. However, the ANC was in an alliance with the New National Party (NNP), which had 11% of the votes, which allowed the ANC-NNP coalition to form a provincial government. During the 2005 floor crossing period all of the NNP members of the Provincial Parliament moved to the ANC, giving the ANC an absolute majority in the province. The ANC chose Ebrahim Rasool as Premier; in 2008 he was replaced by Lynne Brown. The provincial leader of the ANC is Mcebisi Skwatsha.
The official opposition in the Western Cape after the 2004 elections was the Democratic Alliance (DA), which received 27% of the vote in the provincial ballot. A multi-party coalition led by the DA has also controlled the City of Cape Town, the most populous municipality in the province, since the 2006 municipal elections.
In the election of 22 April 2009 the ANC was unseated by the DA, which took 51.46% of the vote. This election marked the first time since the end of apartheid that a party scored an overall majority in the province. The DA leader Helen Zille replaced Lynne Brown as Premier on 6 May 2009.
In the election of 7 May 2014 the DA maintained its hold on the province, increasing its majority to 59.4%.
The Western Cape is also a very volatile art of South Africa especially in 2015 when student protests broke out and resulted a mass break-ins into parliament. The African National Congress has also claimed that it would make the Western Cape "Ungovernable" and has also been caught framing Helen Zille and stated that she tried to hire a hacker to attack the African National Congress and delete their important documents.
The Western Cape is also the only province that isn't a black majority so the residents have made small strides to get independence, like the Freedom Front Plus who wants to make the Western Cape an autonomous region apart from the rest of the Republic of South Africa. The DA has also claimed that it is a victim of its own success because it doesn't receive the funding that it generates from tax, thus it is under-budget. The Western Cape also has the best service record and has the highest economic growth.


== Election results ==
Notes:


== References ==
^ 2009 provincial results News24. 25 April 2009
^ "Applause as Zille secures premiership". IOL. 6 May 2009. Retrieved 6 May 2009. 


== See also ==
Politics of South Africa
Government of the Western Cape