Research, Assistance, Intervention, Deterrence, commonly abbreviated RAID (French: Recherche, Assistance, Intervention, Dissuasion) is the name of an elite tactical unit of the French National Police. Unlike the regional National Police Intervention Groups (GIPN) units of the National Police, RAID is France's primary national counter-terrorism unit, the police equivalent of the National Gendarmerie's National Gendarmerie Intervention Group (GIGN), with exclusive jurisdiction on the 21 closest départements of Paris. RAID was founded by Robert Broussard and Ange Mancini in 1985, in response to a bombing and murder campaign. Since 2009, RAID is included within the French Police Intervention Force, alongside GIPN and the Research and Intervention Brigade (BRI) of Paris.


== MissionsEdit ==
Counter-Terrorism in coordination with UCLAT: In that case, The RAID can intervene nationwide if the situation is very risky.
Hostage Situation
Mutiny
Arrest of high-profile criminals


== HistoryEdit ==
On 13 May 1993, a man named Erick Schmitt, calling himself "HB" (for "Human Bomb", in English), and carrying large quantities of explosives, took 21 children hostage in a school in Neuilly-sur-Seine. Nicolas Sarkozy, mayor of Neuilly at the time, secured the release of several children. He was later removed from the negotiation process, as he was not a professional negotiator and thus risked interfering with the police. After 46 hours, with Schmitt falling asleep, members of RAID crept into the school to evacuate the six remaining children. Schmitt was shot dead by three bullets to the head as he tried to reach the explosives. All the children were safe, as well as their teacher and a nurse.
Previously, in 1987 RAID was responsible for the arrest of several members of Action Directe in a separate anti-terrorist action.
In 1996, in Roubaix, the unit neutralized the Gang de Roubaix, a 14-member terrorist group tied to the Armed Islamic Group of Algeria (GIA), suspected of several bank robberies, murders and a missed attack against a Group of Seven (G7) meeting in Lille. The assault was very violent and resulted in the death of 4 terrorists. 2 RAID operatives were also injured, one by a grenade blast, the other one hit by a bullet in a lung. Christophe Caze, the head of the group, escaped the building in flame but was killed at a Belgium checkpoint during a gunfight with Customs agents. Several days later, thanks to an electronic device found on Caze's body, Fateh Kamel, head of a terrorist cell in Montreal was arrested in Jordan and tried in France.
RAID operators saw action during the 2005 and 2006 riots in France, as well as in a hostage situation in Versailles, where an armed man was shot dead by RAID operators after coming under attack.
On 21 and 22 March 2012, RAID was in charge to arrest Mohammed Merah, the main suspect for shooting sprees in Toulouse and Montauban. RAID surrounded the flat where Merah was entrenched. After 30 hours of siege, RAID stormed the flat to apprehend Merah who fought back. After a 4 minutes of heavy gunfight, Merah was shot down by a RAID sniper while exiting the building.
On 9 January 2015 RAID was the principal unit that ended the hostage situation at the kosher supermarket Hypercacher on the second day of the January 2015 Paris terrorist attacks.
On 14 November 2015 RAID took part in operations at the Bataclan theatre, where 89 people were killed during a series of bombings, shootings and hostage taking in Paris on 13 – 14 November. On 18 November RAID took part in a follow-up operation in Saint-Denis seeking Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the 'mastermind' of the attacks, who was killed.
RAID is in charge of the protection of foreign dignitaries traveling in France. During special events, RAID is also in charge of protecting French individuals abroad (For example, the French Delegation during the Olympic Games is under RAID protection during the whole event). Three of its members have died in service.


== OrganisationEdit ==
RAID has a strength of around 180 men and is divided into three main sections with about 60 members each:
First Section
The first section deals with the usual tasks of special forces: intervention, monitoring, protection.
Second Section
The second section is the Research and Development unit of the RAID. It studies techniques and collects information. This section is divided into three groups:
Intelligence Group
Technical Group
Weaponry Group

Third section
The Third section deals with the psychological aspects of the interventions. It is in charge of negotiations and crisis management. It also provides psychological support for the policemen in the unit and in the whole French Police. It is composed of forensic experts, a psychologist and physicians.
The Negotiation group is on permanent alert. It deals with suicides, violent crises, mental disorders, hostage crises and other major troubles, independently from the rest of the RAID. It assesses the dangers of the situation, suggests possible solutions, and helps with the negotiations and the resolution of the crises. If the whole RAID has to intervene, the Negotiations section is used as a reconnaissance unit, and prepares the intervention of the other sections. To join the unit, an officer needs five years duty within the Police Nationale and after passing a thorough test he will serve in the RAID for five years. With a commendation he can expand it further five years. All members must leave the tactical unit after ten years. Officers over forty cannot make an application.


== SpecialitiesEdit ==
Assault Groups
Sniper
Parachutist
Diver
Demolition
Breaching
Group of Research and Information
Dog handlers
Logistics
Negotiators


== EquipmentEdit ==
Benelli M3
Beretta M3P4
Colt M4A1
FN SCAR
FN Herstal Minimi
FN Herstal P90
Franchi SPAS-15
Glock 17 / 17L / 18 / 19 / 26 / 34
Heckler & Koch G36
Heckler & Koch HK53
Heckler & Koch HK69A1
Heckler & Koch MP5K
Heckler & Koch PSG1
Manurhin MR 73
PGM Precision Hecate II
PGM Precision Ultima Ratio
Remington 870
Rheinmetall MG3
SIG Sauer SG553
Saiga-12


== See alsoEdit ==
Groupe d'Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale (GIGN)
Groupes d'Intervention de la Police Nationale (GIPN)
Escadron parachutiste d'intervention de la Gendarmerie nationale (EPIGN)


== NotesEdit ==


== BibliographyEdit ==
All the following articles are in French
Le RAID, l'ultime recours (RAID, the last resort) by Jean-Louis Courtois published by Crépin-Leblond in 2000
Le RAID, Unité d'élite de la Police Nationale publié aux éditions The RAID, an elite unit of the National Police published by Crépin-Leblond in 2005 (DVD included)
Le RAID, l'unité d'élite de la Police Française de Jean-Louis Courtois RAID, an elite unit of the French police by Jean-Louis Courtois published by Pygmalion-Gérard Watelet in 1999
HB, 46 heures qui ont bouleversé la France de Jean-Pierre About HB, 46 hours that shook France Jean-Pierre About editions Tarcher in 2005
Le jour où j'ai tué HB de Daniel Boulanger The day I killed HB Daniel Boulanger Literature published by Hachette in 2007
Le RAID en action Hors Série RAIDS n°19 paru The RAID action RAIDS Off Series No. 19 issued in 2005
RAID, 20 ans d'action, RAID, 20 years of action, article published in the magazine Commando No. 20 January–December 2005
La sélection du RAID, The selection of RAID, article published in the magazine Police Pro No. 8 March–April 2008
Le RAID, 20 ans d'opérations, RAID 20 years of operations, article published in the magazine RAIDS No. 233 in October 2005
RAID: refuser la fatalité paru RAID: reject the inevitability published in the magazine Police Frequency No. 2 October 1987
La police face à l'exception: flics de choc article paru dans le magazine Civic n°53 août-septembre 1995 The police deal with the exception of shock cops article published in the magazine Civic No. 53 in August–September 1995


== External linksEdit ==
Unofficial Site
Specwarnet report (English)