The Royal Malaysia Police (Abbreviation: RMP; Malay: Polis Diraja Malaysia, PDRM) is a (primarily) uniformed federal police force in Malaysia. The force is a centralised organisation with responsibilities ranging from traffic control to intelligence gathering. Its headquarters is located at Bukit Aman, Kuala Lumpur. The police force is led by an Inspector-General of Police (IGP). The post is held by Tan Sri Khalid Abu Bakar. The constitution, control, employment, recruitment, fund, discipline, duties and powers of the police force is specified and governed by the Police Act 1967.
In carrying out its responsibilities, the regular RMP is also assisted by a support group of Extra Police Constables, Police Volunteer Reserves, Auxiliary Police, Police Cadets and a civilian service element.
Rakan Cop is a community outreach programme launched in 9 August 2005.
The RMP constantly co-operates closely with police forces worldwide, which include those from the five neighbouring countries Malaysia shares border with: Indonesian National Police, Philippine National Police, Royal Brunei Police Force, Royal Thai Police and Singapore Police Force.


== HistoryEdit ==

A police force has been in existence in Malaysia since the days of the Malacca Sultanate. Malacca's canonical law created what was essentially a police force in Malaysia in the fifteenth century, through the institution of the Temenggung and Hulubalang, or royal warriors. During the Sultan of Malacca's absence, the Bendahara, or Prime Minister, held absolute authority, with the power to hand out sentences, but it was the Temenggung who acted as the Police Chief or Inspector General of Police. His tasks were to arrest criminals, build jails and implement sentences. Apart from the Temenggung, there were a number of Penghulu or village chiefs who had the duty of policing their respective villages. Their main tasks included tax collection, law enforcement and preserving village security. These Malacca police systems ended when, on 10 August 1511, a Portuguese fleet led by Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Malacca for the Portuguese crown. Police duties were then largely performed by the Portuguese soldiers.
During the sixteenth century, Malaysia became a cosmopolitan society and the Portuguese government introduced the Kapitan administration. On 14 January 1641, however, the Portuguese lost Malacca to the Dutch Empire, when the Dutch invaded with the help of soldiers from Johor state, at a time when the Portuguese were at war with the Sultanate of Acheh. The Dutch retained the Kapitan system, but when the growing number of Europeans in Malaysia made change necessary, a police force known as the 'Burgher Guard' was established. The Burgher Guard was controlled by the Dutch, but their subordinates were made up of the local citizens. Village leaders continued to assume the duties of policemen under Dutch rule, as they had since before the Portuguese arrived.
Following the assimilation of Malacca into the British Empire in 1795, a modern police organisation in Malaysia was formed, on 25 March 1807, after the Charter of Justice in Penang was granted. Most of the officers were of British origin. Later, this organisation was developed in the Straits Settlements and other Malay states, particularly the Federated Malay States. At that time, independent police forces were established for each respective state. Only after World War II was a central police organisation formed, known as the Civil Affairs Police Force. This organisation was formed in Malaya and led by a British colonial, H.B. Longworthy, who had to stabilise the police forces after the anarchy of Japanese occupation. One of the immediate problems faced by the police at this time was the rebellion of the communist party. During the confrontation between Malaysia and Indonesia, which lasted from 1963 to 1965, the police force, along with military forces, fought against the infiltration of Indonesian forces into the states of Johor and Sabah.
Almost a year after Independence Day, on 24 July 1958, the King of Malaysia, Tuanku Abdul Rahman Ibni Almarhum Tuanku Muhamad, bestowed the title Royal to the Malayan Federations Police Force. In 1963, the Royal Federation of Malayan Police (RFMP), the North Borneo Armed Constabulary and the Sarawak Constabulary were merged to form the Royal Malaysia Police. The Singapore Police Force became a component unit of the RMP until Singapore's independence in 1965.


== InsigniaEdit ==

The flag and insignia of the Royal Malaysia Police has a blue coloured background which symbolises the Malaysian masses. In the centre of the flag is the PDRM symbol within silver or white coloured. The police symbol is made up of an intersected Kris and Ilang / Klewang machete. Above of the PDRM symbol, there is a tiger head garlaned by "Paddy Garland" and under it, is "Polis Diraja Malaysia" scroll with the word. Arabic lettering in the Crown includes the words Allah on the right and Muhammad on the left.


=== Moon and starEdit ===
The Moon and Star symbolise Islam as the official religion of Malaysia.


=== CrownEdit ===
The crown, depicted on the Royal Malaysia Police insignia, is a panegyric reference to the King of Malaysia, bestowing the "Royal" title to its name. The words Allah and Muhammad in Arabic, which respectively symbolise Allah the Almighty and Muhammad as the Messenger, signifies Islam as the official religion and faith of RMP personnel, who are willing to uphold justice and the security of the people of Malaysia.


=== Kris and the Ilang SwordEdit ===
The Kris is an important symbol of the Malay Peninsula. This particular weapon was used by Malay warriors in the past. According to Frey (2003), who concluded from Sir Stamford Raffles' (1817) study of the Candi Sukuh, the kris came into existence around AD 1361. Others believe that early forms were inspired by the daggers of the Dong-Son in Vietnam (circa 300 BC). In the temples of Borobudur (825 CE) and Prambanan (850CE), renderings of the Kris have been found.
The traditional machete, Ilang or Klewang symbolises the states of Sarawak and Sabah in East Malaysia and it represents the spirit of heroism of a multitude of ethnic tribes such as the Dayak, the Dusun, the Bajau, and the Kadazan.


=== Tiger headEdit ===
The tiger head symbolises courage, strength and spirits of RMP. Previously, RMP used a lion head as the symbol of courage from 16 September 1963, after the formation of Malaysia, until 15 May 1994, when it was replaced with the tiger head by an official order of Malaysian government. The former lion head also symbolised the states of Singapore (until 1965) and Sabah.


=== Paddy flowerEdit ===
Paddy flower is a reference to paddy and rice, the staple food for Malaysians and it signifies national prosperity.


=== MottoEdit ===
The RMP motto represents team spirit and determination.


=== Sang Saka BiruEdit ===
The PDRM flag is called the Blue Perennial or Sang Saka Biru; each colour has its own distinctive meaning and the flag symbolises the force's pride and integrity.


== Police PledgeEdit ==
Section 3 (3) Police Act 1967 stipulates that the duties of the Royal Malaysia Police personnel are as follows:
Apprehending all persons whom he is by law authorised to apprehend;
Processing security intelligence;
Conducting prosecutions;
Giving assistance in the carrying out of any law relating to revenue, excise, sanitation, quarantine, immigration and registration;
Giving assistance in the preservation of order in the ports, harbours and airports of Malaysia, and in enforcing maritime and port regulations;
Executing summonses, subpoenas, warrants, commitments and other process lawfully issued by any competent authority;
Exhibiting information;
Protecting unclaimed and lost property and finding the owners thereof;
Seizing stray animals and placing them in a public pound;
Giving assistance in the protection of life and property;
Protecting public property from loss or injury;
Attending the criminal courts and, if specially ordered, the civil courts, and keeping order therein; and
Escorting and guarding prisoners and other persons in the custody of the police.


== Modern DayEdit ==


== RMP Organisational StructureEdit ==
Apart from the 2 departments involved in the administration viz Management Department and Logistics Department, RMP have 6 departments involved in crime prevention viz Criminal Investigation Division, Narcotics Criminal Investigation Division, Internal Security and Public Order Department (KDN / KA), Special Branch, Commercial Crime Investigation Department and Counter-Terrorism Special Operations Team. All departments are led by the directors with the rank of Commissioner of Police (Army Equivalent rank of Three Stars General or Lieutenant-General)


=== Police HeadquartersEdit ===


=== Staff departmentsEdit ===


==== Management DepartmentEdit ====
The Management Department is tasked with the routine of management and administration affairs of the RMP. This department is also the nerve centre of the RMP and acts as the support services platform for the rest of the force.
Functions
Service / Designation – Includes: Recruitment, Service Records Administration, Confirmations, Promotions, Transfers, Salaries & Allowances Administration and Retirements.
General Administration And Policy – Includes: General Administration, Research & Development, Civil Affairs, Welfare, Sports And PERKEP (Persatuan Keluarga Polis or Police's Family Association, generally social activities for the families of the policemen)
Training – Includes: Basic Course, Development Courses, Further Studies and Rehabilitation Courses.
Discipline – Includes: Monitoring of Terms Of Reference / Filtering, Investigations / Action / Counseling.
Branches
Administration
Welfare
Training
Research & Development
Services / Designation
Public Affairs
Public Relations
Intake
Ceremonies
Camp Commandant
BAKA
RMP Sports Council


==== Logistics DepartmentEdit ====
The Logistics Department provides equipment needed in the RMP.
Functions
Operate operating budget and RMP's development
Plan, manage, operate and maintain communications, information technology, transport and weaponry
Manage projects and maintain buildings and properties
Manage turnover and supply of general equipment
Manage RMP's assets
Branches
Naziran's Branch / Administration
Communications Branch
Information Technology Branch
Transport Branch
Finance Branch
Technical Turnover
Weaponry Branch
General Turnover
Part of the Building
Disposal / Stock / Verification / Write-off


==== Criminal Investigation DivisionEdit ====

This department deals with the investigation, arrest and prosecution of hard crimes (murder, robbery, rape etc.) and petty crimes (theft, house-breaking etc.). This department also specialises in gambling, vice and secret societies (triads).
Functions
Investigations and Detective Duties
Arrests and Prosecutions
Enforcement of laws related to gambling, vice and secret societies
Branches
D1 – Administrative Division
D2 – Criminal Record Registration
D3 – Internal Affairs
D4 – Statistics
D5 – Prosecution and Law Divisions
D6 – Technical Assistance Division
D7 – Gambling / Vice / Secret Societies
D8 – Investigation Division / Planning
D9 – Special Investigation Division
D10 – Forensic Laboratory Division
D11 – Sexual Investigation Division
D12 – National Centre Bureau-Interpol Division
The Criminal Investigation Division is headed by a Commissioner of Police (CP). It also runs Unit Tindakan Cepat.


==== Narcotics Criminal Investigation DivisionEdit ====

This department's function is to fight against dangerous drugs by enforcing the law to stop and reduce the demand and supply of dangerous drugs.
Functions
Enforce drug abuse and drug trafficking
Collect, study, assess and spread drug-related information
Investigate distributors activities and drug trafficking syndicates
Fight drug smuggling activities including chemicals used to process drugs
Implement prevention of drug abuse programmes
Exchange data/information with domestic and international agencies
Keep records and statistics related to drug distribution and other drug-related matters
Surveillance activity for former drug offenders or members formerly associated with drug trafficking syndicates
Provide training locally/overseas for officers / members of narcotics department
Attend the meetings, seminars related to drugs, locally/oveseas
Branches
Special Investigation Divisions
Coordinator Part / International-relations
Administrative Divisions
Detention Divisions
Estate Stripping
Interrogate
Expert / Technical Assistance
Record / Statistics
Registration
Logistics Divisions
Airport Customs Staff
Narcotics Criminal Investigation Division lead by Police Commissioner (CP).


==== Internal Security and Public Order Department (KDN / KA)Edit ====

This department is tasked with the maintenance of public security and order. It is responsible for traffic control and search & rescue (SAR) operations. In this role, this department cooperates with other agencies, such as the Malaysian Armed Forces and Army / Navy Maritime Patrol to prevent piracy and to secure the national borders. In addition, it assists the Transport Ministry and the Public Enterprises Ministry in the enforcement of the Traffic Act.
The main branches under this department are:


==== General Operations ForceEdit ====

The Police Field Force (PFF) organised in battalions, was once the para-military units of the Royal Malaysia Police. The force, which was also known as the Jungle Squad (Pasukan Polis Hutan (PPH) in Malay) was tasked to operate in the jungle fringes in counter-insurgency roles during the Malayan Emergency, Indonesia–Malaysia confrontations and later Communist guerrilla insurgencies along the Malaysian-Thai border and in the jungles of Sabah and Sarawak. When the Malayan Communist Party (MCP) and Clandestine Communist Organisation (CCO) finally gave up their armed struggle in 1989 and 1990, PFF lost its role. It was reorganised as the General Operations Force (GOF). The GOF has 19 battalions and the 19th Special Battalion is tasked to provide VIP security.
When established in the year 1948, the PFF had 19 battalions of which two battalions were made up of indigenous people. These battalions were known as Senoi Praaq Battalions. One battalion was a Special Security Battalion.

The 19 battalions are organised into 5 brigades, each headed by a Superintendent of Police. The North Brigade and Sabah Brigade have 4 battalions each, the Central Brigade has 5 battalions, and South-East Brigade and Sarawak Brigade have 3 battalions each.
It all began in the year 1948, when Malayan Communist Party murdered 3 European farmers at Sungai Siput, Perak and also murdered the 3 leaders of Kuomintang (Chinese Nationalist Party).Sir Edward Gent declared an emergency on 7 July 1948 in all Malaya Federations, starting with Perak on 16 June 1948 and Johore on 19 June 1948. To deal with rebellion and to hunt down the Communist terrorists in the jungle, a military based team was formed in 1948 and it was named the Flying Squad and later renamed as Jungle Squad, with their main mission to fight against the Communists. The first Jungle Squad unit was established at Sik, Kedah in 1949. Training centres were opened in Sungai Buluh, Selangor and in Dusun Tua, Hulu Langat, Selangor which was known as Field Force Special Training Centre (SLPPH). In 1964, SLPPH was transferred to Kroh, Perak then changed to Kentonmen, Ulu Kinta, Perak. After being renamed the General Operations Force or Pasukan Gerakan Am in 1997, SLPPH is now known as Sekolah Latihan Pasukan Gerakan Am (General Operations Force Training Centre, SLPGA).
So far, there are two Senoi Praaq battalions specialising in search and rescue operations. After VAT 69 was absorbed into Pasukan Gerakan Khas, along with anti-terrorist police force and Special Action Unit (UTK – Unit Tindakan Khas), a special platoon of PGA, Tiger Platoon was established.


==== Police Counter-Terrorism UnitEdit ====
When the seeming threat of global terrorism started to increase after the incident of 11 September in United States, followed up by several series of bombings in Bali and Jakarta, Indonesia and in Malaysia, the RMP has formed 2 anti-terrorism corps. These two elite forces are known as Pasukan Gerakan Khas (PGK) and Unit Gempur Marin (UNGERIN).


===== Pasukan Gerakan KhasEdit =====

Pasukan Gerakan Khas is a major elite force in the Royal Malaysia Police, which is composed of VAT 69 and Special Actions Unit (UTK). This team was first merged in 1997 and became known as the Maroon Berets. However, this integration did not last and in 2003 it was separated. The VAT 69 changed to the Sandy Brown Berets, honoured by British 22nd Special Air Service (SAS). However, both units serve under the Pasukan Gerakan Khas and is under the command of a Senior Assistant Commissioner II.
This special counter-terrorism police team is also involved in some operations within Malaysia, including military operations with Malaysian Army 22nd Commando Regiment Grup Gerak Khas against the Al-Ma'unah organisation formed in Bukit Jenalik, Sauk, Perak. This team also served under the United Nations in Timor Leste and in the search and rescue operation of 700 officers and members of Indonesian National Police BRIMOB (Brigade Mobil) that were lost and trapped during the tsunami incident in Aceh, Indonesia at the end of 2005. This team also cooperated with Criminal Investigation Division to fight against dangerous crimes, among where the PGK successfully tracked down the notorious 'Gang M16' which comprised several ethnic Chinese criminals, including the group leader who was an ex-serviceman of Singapore, and the leader Gang 13 (Mat Komando), as well as other operations. The motto of VAT 69 is WARISAN DARAH PERWIRA (Literal meaning: INHERITANCE OF THE BLOOD OF WARRIORS), while for the UTK it is TANGKAS BANTERAS GANAS (Literal meaning: QUICK TO OVERCOME TERROR).


===== UNGERINEdit =====

Unit Gempur Marin (UNGERIN) (Marine Combat Unit) was established in 2006 and it was fully operational by the end of 2007 with the first name as the Unit Selam Tempur due to the pressing need to suppress the pirate attacks alongside the coastal area of Malacca Straits and open sea area of South China Sea which were continuously widespread from time to time despite various efforts done to overcome the problem. The members received special training from the United States after realising the need to form a special unit to secure the national waters and riverine fronts from any untoward incidents. This unit is placed under formation Marine Police Branch which is based in the Marine Police Base at Kampung Aceh, Sitiawan, Perak and Lahad Datu, Sabah. It has a big role in handling threats from pirates, robbery, kidnapping and hijacking of ships and terrorist attacks in national waters. The 30 members of UNGERIN are trained by instructors from US Navy SEALs and US Coast Guard in Langkawi and Kota Kinabalu and are armed with special weaponry, such as Glock 19, MP5 and Colt M4A1 (possibly supported by the United States) and utilise maritime anti-terrorist tactics employed by the units of United States Navy commandos. For the unit's restructuring, the name of UST was changed to Unit Gempur Marin or UNGERIN in the year 2008. Its eventual goal is to have 200 operators on standby with UNGERIN.
In the first phase, the 30-personnel strong special force is to undergo training in Langkawi and Kota Kinabalu, by instructors from Navy SEALs. Besides the basic diving training, they will be trained with other basic training, including tactical warfare, marksmanship, sniping, bomb disposal, direct action, sabotage, counter-terrorism, and intelligence gathering and paramedic training, along with special missions which are normally handled by special forces.


==== Federal Reserve UnitEdit ====

The Federal Reserve Unit (Malay: Pasukan Simpanan Persekutuan) is better known with the abbreviation FRU. Their role is riot suppression, crowd control, disaster relief & rescue, as well as special operations assistance. Established in 5 December 1955, it consisted of only 3 troops then. The FRU played a role in resolving some high profile riots, including the racial riots of 13 May 1969 and in the combined operations to catch Ibrahim Libya in the Memali Incident of Baling, Kedah which ended with 16 deaths including Ibrahim and 3 police officers.
The FRU is directly under the Inspector-General of Police. This unit is independent and is able to be rapidly deployed.
As the premiere RMP public order unit, the FRU is designed, equipped and specially trained for duties in suppressing and dismissing riots and illegal assemblies. Aside from the stated roles above, the unit is also tasked with the following functions:
Public Control – during mass public assembly, such as VIPs visitors, sports event, mass rallies and processions,
To deal with pre and post “Chemical, Biological, Radiological And Nuclear" threats,
Disaster Rescue assistance including floods, fires, train derailments, landslides, aircraft crashes, etc; to rescue, prevent theft, and area inclusion involved,
Crime prevention in helping a District Police Chief in the area which particular experience sharp rise frequent a crime rate or crime happened, to certain term,
Massive operation, such as encircle and find, heat and arrested on extremist groups or gangster elements, intensive patrol and Curfew enforcement.
The FRU is led by a Commander, and assisted by a Deputy Commander. They report to the Director of Public Order. They are aided by a few Staff Officers and known as Commanding Headquarters. FRU each in lead by one Commanding Officer. Every FRU troops in lead by one Troop Officer. FRU training centre presided by a Commandant. Per unit and FRU training centre has a membership to aid the administration and known as group headquarters unit.
FRU was awarded a pennant flags in year 1971 and further replaced in year 1997. These pennants are given by King of Malaysia as an appreciate charity service and FRU service during a unit establishment for maintain a national public order. During official ceremonies where the FRU affect as a parent body or detachment; such as Guard of Honour, Mess Night of FRU or Parade in conjunction with Police Anniversaries and FRU Anniversaries, FRU banner may be issued and am being marched by directing and IGP approval, Internal Security and Public Order Director or FRU Commander.


==== C4-i Implementations SystemEdit ====

C4-i Implementation System (abbreviation for Command, Control, Communications, Computer-Integrated) unit is based at Police Control Centre in all police contingents in Malaysia. This unit is assigned to patrol the city and the suburbs. This unit was first established in Bukit Aman and Kuala Lumpur is the first contingent to implement this system. This unit is equipped with the CCTV system which is installed in different parts of the city and monitored by the Contingent Control Centre and each patrol car is also equipped with C4-i's system connected to a laptop. The C-4i also plays a role in forming Rakan Cops in 2006 to foster closer ties with the civilian community. Since then, the crime rates in major towns have decreased and brought about good reviews on the C4-i's and Rakan Cops implementation.


==== Mounted Police UnitEdit ====


==== Traffic BranchEdit ====


==== Marine Operations ForceEdit ====

The Marine Operations Force or Malay: Pasukan Gerakan Marin is the Marine Police division tasked with maintaining law and order and co-ordinating search and rescue operations in the Malaysian Maritime Zone and on the high seas. Its responsibility was to maintain security at the parts in Penang and the Straits of Johor. In 6 February 2009, the name of Malaysian Marine Police was changed and known as Pasukan Gerakan Marin (English: Marine Operations Force). The rename of the organisation was launched by the Minister of Home Affair, Dato' Seri Syed Hamid Albar at PULAMAR (Abbreviation of Pusat Latihan Marin or Marine Police Training Centre), Tampoi, Johor Bahru and witness by Tan Sri Musa Hassan, the Inspector General of Police and all senior police officers and the media.
It operates from five regional bases around the peninsula and East Malaysia. Each of these regional bases are organised similarly to the Neighbourhood Police Centres of the land divisions, and conduct patrols within their maritime sectors. The PGM conducts round-the-clock patrols in Malaysian territorial waters from its five regional bases, in an area of more than 142, 393 km2 and 450, 233 km2 for EEZ as well as 4490 km for coastline. It is also responsible for maintaining law and order on most of Malaysia's islands. The PGM use 15 PZ class patrol boats, 33 PX class, 68 PA/PT/PC/PLC and 4 PSC/PGR/PAR class patrol boats. The branch have five main bases, 11 small bases and 24 forward bases.


==== Malaysian Control CentreEdit ====


==== Royal Malaysian Police Air Wing UnitEdit ====

Royal Malaysia Police Air Wing Unit or Unit Udara PDRM (UUP) is a special unit of Royal Malaysia Police. Has a vital role in maintaining national security with thorough surveillance and patrol from the air. Established on 1 February 1979. The commander of the unit was known as Air Wing Chief initially. Started police operations with 4 Cessna CU 206G officially on 7 April 1980 with operations focused in Peninsula of Malaysia. Now, UUP owns 10 helicopters AS355 F2 and N series, 6 CE 208 Caravan, 5 Pilatus Porter PC-6, 4 Cessna 172Sp, and 5 Beechcraft KingAir 350 (KingAir 350 is an advanced aircraft with latest Proline-21 avionics system). Police Air Unit has 4 bases in Sg. Besi Base (Simpang Airport), PLUUP (Ipoh Airport), Sarawak Base (Kuching International Airport) and Sabah Base (Kota Kinabalu International Airport).
The Internal Security and Public Order Department is led by a Commissioner of Police, CP Dato' Salleh.


==== Special BranchEdit ====

This department is responsible for collecting intelligence for national security. Its role is to collect security intelligence related to both domestic and external threats, intercept subversive activities by extremist groups and individuals which could threaten the nation's stability. Also, it is in charge of obtaining, processing, evaluating and disseminating information to other departments and organisations. This department is divided into several branches: Technical Intelligence, Social Intelligence, External Intelligence, Political Intelligence, Economic Intelligence And Security Intelligence.
The Special Branch is headed by a Commissioner of Police (CP).


==== Commercial Crimes Investigation DepartmentEdit ====
This department's main function is to investigate, arrest, and prosecute offenders committing white collar crimes such as fraud, breach of trust, cyber-crimes, forgery, counterfeiting etc.
The Commercial Crimes Investigation Department is headed by a Commissioner of Police (CP).


== Police Uniform & EquipmentEdit ==

Police Constable: The new constable uniform was introduced in 2008. The headgear is dark navy blue beret with a silver police force emblem on top of the left eye. Dark navy blue long sleeve shirt along with their dark navy blue cargo pants are tucked into military boots.
A name tag that includes the person is worn on the right together with the police shield above it while the word "Polis" (mean police in Malay) is emblemed in the another side. Police service number wear under the name tag and a rank insignia on their right arm.
The Sam Browne belt was replaced by the brand new ballistic nylon police duty belt equipped with a standard issue Walther P99 or Px4 Storm handgun, two extra 10 round magazines, a pair of Hiatt Speedcuffs, a T-baton, a pepper spray, a LED flashlight and a walkie-talkie. Sometimes they are equipped with a Heckler & Koch MP5 submachinegun during a special situation too.
Traffic: Wearing a white helmet or dark navy blue cap (while on duty), white long sleeve shirt with a reflective yellow vests, black riding pants with a yellow strip and a riding boot. Their equipment is the same as constables except that they have a whistle in their left pocket.


== Police rankEdit ==
Lower ranks of police officers apart from sub-inspectors wear their rank insignia on the right sleeve of their uniforms. Sub-inspectors and higher ranks wear their rank insignia on epaulettes on both shoulders.


== Police fleetEdit ==


== FirearmsEdit ==

1M4 Carbine; replacing M16 rifles, the future standard issue rifles supplied by SME Ordnance


== Major cases and incidentsEdit ==


=== Lahad Datu IncidentEdit ===
On 11 February 2013, several armed Filipino supporters of the Sultanate of Sulu, calling themselves as the Royal Security Forces of the Sultanate of Sulu and North Borneo, arrived in Lahad Datu district and occupied the village of Tanduo. They were sent by Jamalul Kiram III, a claimant to the throne of the sultanate. His stated goal is to assert the Philippine territorial claim to eastern Sabah as part of the North Borneo dispute. In response, Malaysian security forces surrounded the village. Attempts by the Malaysian and the Philippine governments to reach a peaceful solution with the Sultan's supporters were unsuccessful and the standoff escalated into an armed conflict on 1 March 2013.


=== Shooting of Aminulrasyid AmzahEdit ===
A schoolboy, Aminulrasyid Amzah, was shot dead by police after allegedly trying to escape from a car accident which he was involved in. Aminulrasyid was driving his sister's car without a valid driver's licence after midnight on 3 May 2010, together with his friend, Azamuddin, who was the passenger. He had been trying to flee a number of motorcyclists who were chasing both boys after their vehicle had sideswiped a car earlier that night. After Aminulrasyid was shot, his friend Azamuddin was assaulted and beaten by the police but managed to escape. The IGP and the police have made many statements to the press saying that Aminulrasyid was trying to ram a police roadblock as well as carrying a weapon in the car. Azamuddin and Aminulrasyid's family has refuted many of the police claims. Many members of the public and the opposing politicians have criticised the police's response, alluding to the fact that the police are trying to cover up the incident and fabricate evidence. The boy's family has rejected calls for an inquest into the shooting because they did not believe they would receive a fair and transparent investigation, especially from the police. Instead, they have called on the government to establish a royal commission of inquiry to investigate Aminulrasyid's death. A special eight-member panel has been formed to scrutinise the investigation of the shooting; however, opposing politicians and the boy's family have derided the formation of the panel as a publicity stunt by the government.


=== Recaptured Mas Selamat KastariEdit ===
The escaped terrorist, Mas Selamat bin Kastari, who escaped detention in Singapore in 2008, was nabbed by Bukit Aman and Johore Police while he was asleep in a secluded village house in Skudai, 25 kilometres (16 mi) northwest of Johor Bahru, Johore. He found a traditional kampung house on stilts in Kampung Tawakal, a tiny village with a population of less than 100. Located about 10 km away from the North-South Expressway near the Kempas exit, it is almost impossible to locate for those not familiar with the area. The Singaporean terrorist, who captured world attention when he escaped from the republic's maximum security Whitley Detention Centre in February last year, could barely put up a fight in his shorts and T-shirt when caught during a dawn raid in April. At 6 am, about 30 armed policemen surrounded the kampung house and ordered Mas Selamat to come out. Police broke through two doors and rushed in when he refused to surrender. He was arrested together with two others, Abdul Matin and Johar Hassan, by a PGK and police Special Branch officers following intelligence sharing with the police forces of Indonesia and Singapore. Police also seized documents and other paraphernalia that allegedly revealed their planned operation. This report was later confirmed by both the Singapore and Malaysian governments, with the date of capture given as 1 April 2009.
The Home Minister of Malaysia, Dato' Seri Hishammuddin Hussein, and Inspector-General of Police Tan Sri Musa Hassan at Putrajaya confirmed Mas Selamat was arrested and detained under the Internal Security Act. Hishammuddin declined to give details since the case is sensitive as it involves intelligence agencies of Singapore and Indonesia, as well as Malaysia. Musa said the arrest was made possible as police in Singapore, Indonesia and Malaysia had been sharing intelligence reports over the past year. It is learnt that Special Branch officers had been working on various leads since March and upon confirming his whereabouts planned the dawn raid that resulted in his arrest.


=== Al-Mau'nah Arms HeistEdit ===
In the early morning on 2 July 2000, 21 members of the militant group visited the outpost and camp of Bn 304 Rejimen Askar Wataniah under the guise of a surprise inspection and confiscated the soldiers' weapons and carted the weapons away from the armoury. They took away a huge cache of firearms and ammunition, including 97 M16 assault rifles, four GPMGs, five grenade launchers, 9,095 rounds of 5.56 mm and 60 rounds of 40 mm ammunition. The group was later cornered in the village of Sauk, Perak and involved in a stand-off with the Malaysian Army and Royal Malaysian Police forces. The Malaysian Special Forces threw a containment cordon around Bukit Jenalik. Tpr Matthew anak Medan from 21 Commando was murdered by this militant group and was awarded Pahlawan Gagah Berani. The leader and militant group surrendered to the Malaysian Special Forces and later they were handed over to the police.
The Al-Mau'nah group later surrendered, and the leaders were brought to trial for "waging war upon the King". Mohamed Amin Mohamed Razali and his group were brought to trial for charges of "waging war against the King" and became the first group of people convicted of such charges in Malaysia. Mohamed Amin Mohamed Razali and his two lieutenants, Zahit Muslim and Jamaluddin Darus, were sentenced to death. Sixteen others were given life sentences. Police Detective Korporal Sanghadevan was murdered during the incident. Asisten Superintendan Polis Abdul Razak Mohd. Yusof was awarded the Seri Pahlawan Gagah Perkasa for his role in resolving the stand-off.


=== Memali IncidentEdit ===
The Memali Incident occurred in the remote village of Memali, Baling in the Malaysian state of Kedah on 19 November 1985. A task force of 200 policemen under orders from the Acting Prime Minister and Home Minister Musa Hitam, laid siege to kampung (village) houses in Memali. The houses were occupied by an Islamic sect of about 400 people led by Ibrahim Mahmud a.k.a. Ibrahim Libya.


=== Bukit Kepong IncidentEdit ===
The Bukit Kepong Incident was an armed encounter which took place on 23 February 1950 between the police and the Malayan Communists during pre-independence Malaya. This conflict took place in an area surrounding the Bukit Kepong police station in Bukit Kepong, a wooden station located on the banks of the Muar River, about 59 km from Muar town, Johor.


== Police Headquarters/FormationEdit ==


=== Police ContingentEdit ===
Bukit Aman Royal Malaysia Police Headquarter, Kuala Lumpur 3.148725°N 101.691584°E﻿ / 3.148725; 101.691584
Johor Contingent Police Headquarters, Johor 1.477227°N 103.764673°E﻿ / 1.477227; 103.764673
Kedah Contingent Police Headquarters, Kedah
Kelantan Contingent Police Headquarters, Kelantan
Kuala Lumpur Contingent Police Headquarters, Kuala Lumpur 3.142093°N 101.707142°E﻿ / 3.142093; 101.707142
Melaka Contingent Police Headquarters, Melaka
Negeri Sembilan Contingent Police Headquarters, Negeri Sembilan
Pahang Contingent Police Headquarters, Pahang
Perak Contingent Police Headquarters, Perak
Perlis Contingent Police Headquarters, Perlis
Pulau Pinang Contingent Police Headquarters, Pulau Pinang
Sabah Contingent Police Headquarters, Sabah
Sarawak Contingent Police Headquarters, Sarawak
Selangor Contingent Police Headquarters, Selangor
Terengganu Contingent Police Headquarters, Terengganu


=== Marine Police ForceEdit ===
Northern Region Marine Police Base, Batu Uban, Pulau Pinang
East Region Marine Police Base, Kemaman, Terengganu
Southern Region Marine Police Base, Johor Bahru, Johor
Sabah Region Marine Police Base, Sandakan, Sabah
Sarawak Region Marine Police Base, Kuching, Sarawak
Putrajaya Marine Police Base, Putrajaya


=== Military Police ForceEdit ===
Northern Region Military Police Base
Centre Region Military Police Base
South East Region Military Police Base
Sabah Region Military Base
Sarawak Region Military Base


=== Air Police ForceEdit ===
Paninsular Malaysia Region Air Police Base
Sabah Region Air Police Base
Sarawak Region Air Police Base


=== Commando Police ForceEdit ===
69 Commando Police Base
Special Tactical Unit Police Base


=== Federal Reserve Unit (Anti Riot Police Force)Edit ===
1st Federal Reserve Unit Base
2nd Federal Reserve Unit Base
3rd Federal Reserve Unit Base
4th Federal Reserve Unit Base
5th Federal Reserve Unit Base
6th Federal Reserve Unit Base
7th Federal Reserve Unit Base
Women Federal Reserve Unit Base
Horseman Federal Reserve Unit Base


== Royal Malaysia Police in popular cultureEdit ==


=== BooksEdit ===
Malaya's Secret Police 1945–60: The Role of the Special Branch in the Malayan Emergency, 2008—the history of Malaysian Special Branch, written by former Special Branch officer, and a widely-acknowledged expert on counter-insurgency, Leon Comber.
The Struggle For Malaysian Independence, 2007—the history of Malaysian police force, written by former senior police officer, Dato' Seri J.J. Raj.
Polis Wanita Sejarah Bergambar 1955–2007, 2007 – the history of Malaysian policewomen, written by Chief Inspector Selamat Bin Sainayune.
Smashing Terrorism in the Malayan Emergency: The Vital Contribution of the Police, 2004 – Written by Brian Stewart, a former officer of Malayan Civil Service (MCS).
Inspektor Junid Di Medan Jenayah, 1987 – detective and mystery stories, written by Jalil Abd. Rahman, produced by Fajar Bakti
"Death Waits in the Dark" – Greenwood Press, 2001
The Jungle Beat – Fighting Terrorists in Malaya – the history of Malayan police during fighting against communisme, written by former Federation of Malay State Police officers, Roy Follows.


=== TelevisionEdit ===
Debu-Debu Kota (City Dusts) – Malay drama created by Dato' Yusof Haslam
Skuad Khas (Special Squad) – Malay drama created by Dato' Yusof Haslam
Gerak Khas – Malay drama created by Dato' Yusof Haslam
Roda Roda Kuala Lumpur (Traffic Police) – Malay drama created by Dato' Yusof Haslam
CID 3278 – Malay drama directed by Rosyam Nor.
Kisah Benar - Tragedi (Crime Scene Investigation) – Malay drama featured in TV3
VAT 69 - Warisan Darah Perwira – Malay documentary created by Jins Shamsuddin. Featured on ASTRO RIA.


=== FilmsEdit ===
Bukit Kepong – Malay film starring Jins Shamsuddin
Bayangan Maut – Malay film starring Dato' Yusof Haslam
Police Story 3 – Hong Kong Cantonese film starring Jackie Chan
Entrapment – Hollywood film starring Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones
Don - The Chase Begins Again – Bollywood film starring Shah Rukh Khan and Shaharudin Thamby (Malaysian actors)
The Viral Factor – Hong Kong action thriller films stars Jay Chou and Nicholas Tse


=== Daily lifeEdit ===
Highway patrol
Private properties – Uniformed police officers on duty are likely to hint property owner to "obey the law" to receive "protection" by police.


=== VCD/DVDEdit ===
Jungle Green Khaki Brown – A DVD documentary produced by Media Prima – TV3 and Nickleodeon Books that chronicledexclusive and historical footage from the archives of the British Malayan Library in United Kingdom and from Filem Negara Malaysia for 50th Independence Day, 2005


== Complaints CommissionEdit ==
Non-governmental organisations continued to press the government to create an Independent Police Complaints and Misconduct Commission (IPCMC). In 2005 a Royal Commission of Inquiry into the police had recommended a wide range of reforms, including the establishment of an IPCMC by May 2006. Draft legislation to establish an IPCMC remained under consideration by the Attorney General at the end of the year. A range of other reform recommendations, including repeal or review of laws allowing for detention without trial or requiring police permits for public assemblies, were not implemented.


== See alsoEdit ==

Crime in Malaysia
Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency
Royal Malaysian Custom (RMC)
Anti-Corruption Agency


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
(Malay) Royal Malaysia Police website
Royal Malaysian Police Force
Rank insignia from the International Encyclopedia of Uniform Insignia Around the World
(Malay) Pangkat dan Pakaian @ Rank and Clothing – Polis DiRaja Malaysia
Malaysia Crime Watch
Senoi Praaq