The South African Unemployed Peoples' Movement (SAUPM) is a social movement with branches in Durban, Grahamstown and Limpopo Province in South Africa. It is often referred to as the Unemployed People's Movement or UPM. It is strongly critical of the ruling African National Congress.


== Activities in DurbanEdit ==
On Wednesday 15 July 2009 the movement announced that it would begin appropriating food from supermarkets in Durban if the state did not agree to consult with it on its demand for a basic income grant of R1 500 per month for all unemployed people.
On Wednesday 22 July the movement occupied the Checkers supermarket in Dr Pixley KaSeme Street and the Pick'n'Pay supermarket at The Workshop and began to eat food off the shelves without paying. Police said they arrested 44 people at Checkers and 50 people at Pick'n'Pay. Nozipho Mteshana, then the chairwoman of the movement, said that the appropriation of food in supermarkets would continue despite the arrests. She was placed under house arrest for 18 months following the protest.
The movement has, working together with Abahlali baseMjondolo, also organised a number of protests from the Zakheleni shack settlement in Umlazi, Durban.


== Activities in GrahamstownEdit ==
There is also a branch of the Unemployed People's Movement in Grahamstown in the Eastern Cape. It argues for a bottom up system of democracy. Along with the struggle for employment, housing and electricity women's issues, including the demand for toilets  and campaigns against rape, have emerged as key issues in Grahamstown. The movement has had some success in campaigning against corruption in Grahamstown. The movement has also opposed xenophobia.,
Its current chairperson is Ayanda Kota and the Grahamstown branch works closely with radical students. It has close relationships with other social movements in South Africa, has expressed an intention to affiliate to the Poor People's Alliance, is affiliated to the Democratic Left Front and has supported the global 'Occupy' movement and the struggle against state censorship in South Africa.
The movement claims that the Municipality has often frustrated its right to protest.
According to Mazibuko K. Jara "it has become the most powerful force in the Makana municipality. Its formation represented a collective recognition of the appetite for self-emancipation, and without self-organisation, the unemployed in Grahamstown might as well have remained on the margins of that divided small town. In its short two years of existence, the movement has marched, written deputations, submitted memorandums of demands, held sit-ins, held meetings with the state, used the law and more. It has challenged unemployment, poor-quality housing, lack of housing, lack of water and sanitation, lack of electricity and street lighting, violence against women and problems with the social security system. The movement has humanised politics by concerning themselves with how to rebuild the social fabric of a poor community."


== RepressionEdit ==
The movement has suffered arrests in both Grahamstown and Durban.


== Further readingEdit ==
The Death of Reason and the Water Crisis in the Makana Municipality, Xola Mali, 2010
The Rebellion of the Poor Comes to Grahamstown, UPM Press Statement, 2011
Ten Theses on Democracy, Amandla Magazine, 2011
SA, we cannot say we are free, Ayanda Kota, Afro-Spear, 2011
Sekwenele: It’s enough, Timothy Gabb, Activate, 2011
Photographic essay on the UPM (Grahamstown), by Timothy Gabb, 2011
South Africa on the Global Occupy Map, Anne Garrison, 2011
Malema does not speak for poor youths, Ayanda Kota, Mail & Guardian, 2011
Students and the working class: towards a living solidarity, Ben Fogel, Amandla Magazine, 2011
The revolt of South Africa’s untouchables, by Pedro Alexis Tabensky, Pambazuka, 2011
Secrecy Bill shows ANC's historic mission is over, by Ayanda Kota, Mail & Guardian, December 2011
Is the SACP Still Relevant?, Mazibuko K. Jara, The Times, 2011
The Reign of Thugs, by Pedro Tabensky, January 2012
The Marikana mine workers massacre: a massive escalation in the war on the poor, Ayanda Kota, San Francisco Bay View, August 2012
Qubuda – another dead brick in the wall of rape imprisoning South Africa, Mandy de Waal, The Daily Maverick, 4 March 2012


== See alsoEdit ==
Ayanda Kota
Ben Mafani


== Notes and referencesEdit ==