South End Press was a non-profit book publisher run on a model of participatory economics. It was founded in 1977 by Michael Albert, Lydia Sargent, Juliet Schor, among others, in Boston's South End. It published books written by political activists, notably Arundhati Roy, Noam Chomsky, bell hooks, Winona LaDuke, Manning Marable, Ward Churchill, Cherríe Moraga, Andrea Smith, Howard Zinn and Jeremy Brecher.


== History ==
South End Press was founded in 1977 by Michael Albert, Lydia Sargent, John Schall, Pat Walker, Juliet Schor, Mary Lea, Joe Bowring, and Dave Millikan, among others. It was based in Boston's South End and run as a egalitarian collective with decision-making equally shared.
The publisher got into financial difficulties in the financial crisis of 2007–08, with sales dropping by 12.8% in 2008. In 2009, South End Press moved to a new office in Brooklyn, New York, partnering with Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York. A fundraising campaign was run in 2012 to help ease its financial situation.
South End Press folded in July 2014 due to debt problems. Howard Zinn and an anonymous author had reportedly not received royalties for several years.
Some of South End Press's catalogue has been republished including work by Howard Zinn and Noam Chomsky (on Haymarket Books), Jeremy Brecher (on PM Press), and Eli Clare, Andrea Smith, Frank Wilderson and Dean Spade (on Duke University Press).


== Related projects ==
The founders of South End Press have also been involved with two ongoing political media projects, 'Speak Out' and 'Z Magazine'. They have worked with a number of media and research institutions including Alternative Radio, Political Research Associates, the Committee on Women, Population and the Environment, and INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence.


== Publications ==

Agents of Repression: The FBI’s Secret Wars Against the American Indian Movement and the Black Panther Party by Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall
The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents From the FBI’s Secret Wars Against Dissent in the United States by Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall
Detroit: I Do Mind Dying: A Study in Urban Revolution by Dan Georgakas and Marvin Surkin; Manning Marable (Foreword)
Exile & Pride: Disability, Queerness, and Liberation by Eli Clare; Dean Spade (afterword)
Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel, and the Palestinians by Noam Chomsky; Edward W. Said (Foreword)
Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center by bell hooks
How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America: Problems in Race, Political Economy, and Society by Manning Marable
Loving in the War Years: Lo que nunca pasó por sus labios by Cherríe Moraga
Sisters of the Yam (audio): Black Women and Self-Recovery by bell hooks and Ayo Sesheni (Narrator)
Strike! by Jeremy Brecher


== References ==