Särskilda Operationsgruppen (English: Special Operations Task Group, abbreviated SOG) is a special forces unit within the Swedish Armed Forces which has been active since 2011. The unit is headquartered at Karlsborg Fortress in Karlsborg, Västra Götaland County.


== HistoryEdit ==
Särskilda operationsgruppen was formed in 2011 by merging the Särskilda skyddsgruppen (SSG) and Särskilda inhämtningsgruppen (SIG).


== OrganisationEdit ==
The Special Operations Task Group (SOG), combined with the Special Forces Command, comprises the Swedish Armed Forces Special Forces (FM SF). In addition to this, there are several special forces support units (FM SOF). The personnel are specially selected, trained and equipped units for air, sea and land transportation, technical, logistical and medical support. For example: Special Maritime Transportation unit (STE), Special Signals Group (SSE) and the Section for Special Operative Technology (SOT).
SOG answers directly to the Supreme Commander and the Director Special Forces.
Although, their exact organisation is unknown to the public, it is known that SOG consists of several troops. Each troop then consists of three "teams" or patrols of four operators each.


== ActivitiesEdit ==
What most people see of the operators is when they are employed as personal protection for the Supreme Commander or other high-ranking officers of the Swedish Armed Forces when they visit Swedish areas of operation. However, their most frequent usage is during multi-national special operations such as Direct Action, Special Reconnaissance and Military Assistance.
SOG combat operations are of great strategic importance that cannot be accomplished by conventional forces or weapon systems. Combat missions can be to eliminate high-value targets or objects of great importance to the enemy, to conduct complex rescue operations of Swedish personnel held captive or hostage, or to gather time-critical intelligence through action.
Special reconnaissance and intelligence gathering is intended to gather information of great tactical importance about the enemy´s activities, enemy personnel or other bits of information of operational significance.
Special Forces can also be tasked with advising and training foreign military units as part of an international peace-keeping military operation.
The unit maintains a high degree of readiness and can be deployed on short notice within a 6000 km radius of Stockholm and can operate in any environment, for example jungle, desert, mountain/alpine, sub-arctic and urban. The unit is deployed on request by the UN or the EU but must then be sanctioned on a political level.
The unit is lightly equipped for greater mobility, both tactically and strategically. SOG strive for simplicity in planning and execution, and unpredictability through unconventional and flexible methods.
Due to operational security, the unit's capabilities, equipment, operational methods, previous or on-going operations and the identities of their personnel are classified.
SOG have been deployed in support of ISAF operations in Afghanistan.


== The patrolEdit ==

Each operator has a broader skill base than regular soldiers and one or two patrol skills at which he or she is exceptionally skilled. A typical SOG team consists of four operators: A team leader, a demolitions expert, a radio operator and a medic. Each patrol can be augmented with, EOD technicians, JTAC-specialists or snipers.


== SelectionEdit ==
Selection is open for Armed Forces members of both sexes who are at least eligible for specialist officer's training and can only be attempted once unless mitigating circumstances caused the candidate to fail on the first attempt.
The candidates are advised to prepare themselves at least six months prior to the selection course and are invited to attend a pre-selection weekend where they will be tested and advised on their likelihood of success or failure and also where they need to improve.

The selection process takes two weeks and is held once a year. Historically, candidates for SOG´s predecessor, the SSG were sought out by the unit and invited to attempt selection. Selection for SOG however, is advertised on the Armed Forces website and is open for anyone who meets the basic requirements. The first week of selection consists of an extremely grueling field exercise where the candidates are tested on their fitness, field craft and land navigation and the tests are conducted during great stress. The second week consists of psychological tests, similar to those undertaken by fighter pilots. They are also tested for their predisposition for phobias, such as heights and confined spaces. If the candidate is successful, he or she will begin the basic operator course which lasts for 12 months and is divided into three blocks:
Basic combat skills
Patrol skill
Special skills course
Once completed, the operator will be put in an operational team and can be deployed with the unit.
Operators train at their own compound at a secret location near Karlsborg, which, among shooting ranges, also features a large multi-story CQB-building, with bullet-absorbing lining in its walls. The building also facilitates helicopter insertions on its roof.


== HeraldryEdit ==
The SOG coat of arms is blazoned thusly: Upon a black shield is a six-pointed star in silver in the upper left corner. It was developed by the Armed Forces Board of Traditions and symbolizes the unit´s ability of special problem solving, effectiveness of duty and clandestine operations.


== Similar unitsEdit ==
 Albania – Special Operations Battalion (Albania)
 Australia – Special Air Service Regiment
 Belgium – Special Forces Group
 Canada – Joint Task Force 2
 Denmark – Jægerkorpset
 Denmark – Frømandskorpset
 Germany – Kommando Spezialkräfte
 Ireland - Army Ranger Wing (ARW)
 Iran – 65th Airborne Special Forces Brigade
 Japan – Special Forces Group
 Japan – Special Boarding Unit
 Netherlands – Korps Commandotroepen
 New Zealand - Special Air Service
 Norway – Forsvarets Spesialkommando (FSK)
 Norway – Marinejegerkommandoen (MJK)
 Poland – GROM
 Russia – Alpha Group
 United Kingdom – Special Air Service
 United Kingdom – Special Boat Service
 United States – 1st SFOD-D
 United States – 'DEVGRU'


== See alsoEdit ==
Special Forces
Swedish Armed Forces
Särskilda Inhämtningsgruppen
Fallskärmsjägarna
Kustjägarna


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
http://www.forsvarsmakten.se/sv/Forband-och-formagor/Specialforband/