The World Counter-terrorism Agency (commonly known as the W.C.A.) is a fictional anti-terrorist organization in the Marvel Comics universe. The organization first appeared in New Avengers: The Reunion #1 (2009) and was created by Jim McCann and David Lopez. The acronym W.C.A. is a homage to the West Coast Avengers, a title that prominently featured Hawkeye and Mockingbird.


== Publication history ==
The World Counter-terrorism Agency has appeared in the Hawkeye and Mockingbird related titles New Avengers: The Reunion #1-4 (2009), Hawkeye & Mockingbird #1-6 (2010) and Widowmaker #1-4 (2010-2011).


== Fictional history ==
As part of their secret invasion of Earth, the Skrulls abducted various members of the superhero community and members of S.H.I.E.L.D. to infiltrate positions of authority. Spending years in captivity, the abductees were finally rescued once the Skrull's secret invasion had been averted. But with S.H.I.E.L.D. dissolved, and faced with a world they barely recognized, they had means to start again. Mockingbird, one of the abducted superheroes and an ex-member of S.H.I.E.L.D., secretly created the World Counter-terrorism Agency to give her fellow abductees a purpose in life and to try and to prevent any similar situations from arising in the future.
Clint Barton (as Ronin) later grew suspicious of his ex-wife's secret activities. After a confrontation, Mockingbird revealed her new double life and the existence of the World Counter-terrorism Agency. Clint, afraid of Mockingbird's mental state after being abducted by the Skrulls, accompanied her on a mission to Zaragoza, Spain. Together, they battled Monica Rappaccini and the hordes of A.I.M.. Clint and Mockingbird reconciled after defeating their enemies and thwarting the terrorist plot.
Clint (back in his Hawkeye costume) and Mockingbird work together to uncover Crossfire's illegal arms dealing operation. Crossfire later teams-up with Jaime Slade, the new Phantom Rider, to strike at the personal lives of the two heroes. Hawkeye and Mockingbird fight back and defeat the two supervillains. However, Hawkeye later quits the World Counter-terrorism Agency when it becomes clear that his relationship with Mockingbird has become too strained. Hawkeye is quickly prompted to rejoin by Steve Rogers after a kill list targeting spies (including Mockingbird and Hawkeye's former lover Black Widow) was discovered. Hawkeye, Mockingbird and Dominic Fortune teamed-up with the Black Widow to uncover the reasons behind the kill list. They battle the new Ronin and the Dark Ocean Society. The new Ronin reveals himself to be Black Widow's ex-husband Alexei Shostakov, who was creating unrest between Russia and Japan to form a new Soviet Union. Shostakov was defeated by the heroes and taken into custody.


== Members ==
Mockingbird / Bobbi Morse - Founder and field operations commander
Hawkeye / Clint Barton - Field operative
Twitchy - Senior intelligence analyst
Bangs - Weapons and explosives specialist
London - Research and developer
Dominic Fortune / Duvid Jerome Fortunov - Hired mercenary


== References ==


== External links ==
World Counter-terrorism Agency at Marvel.Wikia.com