The Star is an English-language, tabloid-format newspaper in Malaysia. It is the largest paid for English newspaper in terms of circulation in Malaysia, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations. It has a daily circulation of between 290,000 to 300,000. The Star is also published online for free. The Star Online sits among the most popular news sites in Malaysia. The Star is a member of the Asia News Network.
The Star is majority-owned by the Malaysian Chinese Association, the third-largest party in the ruling Barisan Nasional alliance. Its major competitors are the New Straits Times, and The Sun which is distributed free.


== History ==
The daily newspaper was first published on 9 September 1971 as a regional newspaper based in Penang. The STAR went into national circulation on 3 January 1976 when it set up its new office in Kuala Lumpur. In 1978, the newspaper headquarters was relocated to Kuala Lumpur. The Star continues to expand its wings over the years. In 1981, it moved its headquarters from Kuala Lumpur to Petaling Jaya which is also its current premise to accommodate a growing number of staff and technology devices.
In 1987, The Star was one of the newspapers whose publication licences were withdrawn in Operation Lalang. It resumed publication five months later in March 1988, but after its return, The Star lost its previous 'liberal flavour'.


== Editions ==
The Star (daily) and Sunday Star are published in five editions – two editions which cover the northern peninsular states of Penang, Kedah, Perlis, Kelantan and northern Perak, while another two editions cover the rest of the country. As of March 2010, the newspaper has a separate Sarawak edition priced at RM1.20.
There are two main printing plants that publish four editions of The Star on a daily basis. The northern editions are printed at the Star Northern Hub in Bayan Lepas, Penang, while the other two editions are printed at the Star Media Hub in Bukit Jelutong, Shah Alam, Selangor.


== Features ==
The Star weekday paper is packaged as a 4-in-1 paper, comprising the Main Paper, StarBiz, Star2 and Star Metro. Naturally, this newspaper also contains classifieds.
The Main Paper covers the latest in both local and international news while StarBiz offers a comprehensive coverage of business developments, market trends, financial reports and updates in the stock market. Star2 features articles on lifestyle, entertainment, health, parenting, social etiquette, science, environment, fashion, food, comics and many more. The contents published on the Star Metro varies by edition, covering news and events in a particular region covered by each edition.
Weekly sections include:
StarBytz (every Monday; formerly known as In-Tech): focuses on computers and information technology
R.AGE (every Tuesday): features lifestyle and trends for the young 
StarEducate (Sundays): features careers, school, exam tips, advice on furthering education, commentaries by renowned educationists and updates in the education industry
Star Fit4Life (Sundays): focuses on various aspects of well-being, from medical research to treatments, fitness trends, diet and nutrition, mental health, ageing and public health issues, alternative therapy and healing methods
Life Inspired (Sundays): a luxury-focused pull-out covering topics from art, architecture, travel, fashion, food and more. This section was launched in October 2013. 
Dots (Sundays): News and articles sourced from international media partners covering a varied range of topics from politics and society to people. Provides a deeper insight into thoughts, senses and outlook
The Star BizWeek is a weekly financial magazine published every Saturday that highlights issues, companies, personalities, developments, and stocks that are likely to make news in the week ahead
F1F4 is a fortnightly pull-out published on alternate Mondays. It contains information about Mathematics and Science syllabus for Form One and Form Four.
Stuff@school is a weekly pullout distributed every Monday to schools that subscribe to The Star. It features newsy articles, interviews, book reviews and short stories dedicated to teens.
Star Metro is a pull-out featuring news and events from all of Malaysia and occasionally, abroad. Star Metro also features the classifieds.


== Other publications by Star Media Group ==
Kuntum magazine (published since February 1980)
Shang Hai (published since March 1979 - September 2014)
Galaxie (published October 1974 - December 2013)
Flavours (Recipe Book) (published since December 1994, acquired in 1995)
TV stations
To be added
Radio stations
Red FM: English radio station
Suria FM: Malay radio station
988 FM: Mandarin radio station
Capital FM: Real Radio for Real Women: Capital FM 88.9, Women-The New Capital
Websites
TheStar.com.my: News portal
TheStarTV.com: Online web video portal
StarProperty.my: Online property portal
Propwall.my: Online property classifieds
CarSifu.my: Online automotive/motoring classifieds and news portal
MyStarJob.com: Online job portal
mStar.com.my: Malay-language news portal
Kuali.com: Food portal
Star2.com: Lifestyle portal


== Columnists ==
The Star has many prominent columnists, both from within and without. Among them are Marina Mahathir, daughter of former Prime Minister Tun Mahathir Mohamed, Tan Sri Lin See Yan, former deputy governor of Bank Negara, Martin Khor (since 1978), former head of the Third World Network, Shad Saleem Faruqi, law professor, Karim Raslan and Azmi Sharom.


== Ownership ==
The Star is majority owned by the Malaysian Chinese Association, a political party in Malaysia that represents the Malaysian Chinese ethnicity, one of the component parties of the ruling Barisan Nasional coalition.


== See also ==

List of newspapers in Malaysia


== References ==


== External links ==
thestar.com.my, newspaper's official website