University of California Press, otherwise known as UC Press, is a publishing house associated with the University of California that engages in academic publishing. It was founded in 1893 to publish books and papers for the faculty of the University of California, established 25 years earlier in 1868. Its headquarters are located in Oakland, California.
The University of California Press publishes in the following general subject areas: anthropology, art, California and the West, classical studies, film, food and wine, global issues, history, literature/poetry, music, natural sciences, public health and medicine, religion, and sociology. It also distributes titles published by the Huntington Library, Watershed Media, and publishing programs within the University of California system.
Each year it publishes approximately 180 new books and 54 journals in the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences and keeps about 3,500 book titles in print.


== Notable books ==
Language As Symbolic Action, Kenneth Burke (1966)
The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge, Carlos Castaneda (1968)
The Mysterious Stranger, Mark Twain (definitive edition) (1969, based on work first published in 1916)
Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution
The Making of a Counter Culture
Self-Consuming Artifacts: The Experience of Seventeenth-Century Literature, Stanley Fish (1972)
The Ancient Economy, Moses I. Finley (1973)
Muybridge, Man in Motion, Robert Bartlett Haas (1976)
Joan of Arc: The Image of Female Heroism, Marina Warner (1981)
Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, Benjamin R. Barber (1984)
Art in the San Francisco Bay Area, Thomas Albright (1985)
Religious Experience, Wayne Proudfoot (1985)
The War Within: America's Battle over Vietnam, Tom Wells (1994)
George Grosz: An Autobiography, George Grosz (translated by Nora Hodges) (published 1998, written in 1946, translated in 1955)
The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China
Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy, Kevin Bales (1999)
Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn, Karen McCarthy Brown (2001)
A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in Contemporary America, Michael Barkun (2003)
Bounded Choice
Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-Semitism and the Abuse of History, Norman G. Finkelstein (2005)
Brewing Justice: Fair Trade Coffee, Sustainability and Survival
China Candid
Autobiography of Mark Twain, Mark Twain (2010)


== Notable series ==
The University of California Press re-printed a number of novels under the California Fiction series from 1996-2001. These titles were selected for their literary merit and for their illumination of California history and culture.
The Ford by Mary Austin
Thieves' Market by A.I. Bezzerides
Disobedience by Michael Drinkard
Words of My Roaring by Ernest J. Finney
Skin Deep by Guy Garcia
Fat City by Leonard Gardiner
Chez Chance by Jay Gummerman
Continental Drift by James D. Houston
The Vineyard by Idwal Jones
In the Heart of the Valley of Love by Cynthia Kadohata
Always Coming Home by Ursula K. Le Guin
The Valley of the Moon by Jack London
Home and Away by Joanne Meschery
Bright Web in the Darkness by Alexander Saxton
Golden Days by Carolyn See
Oil! by Upton Sinclair
Understand This by Jervey Tervalon
Ghost Woman by Lawrence Thornton
Who is Angelina? by Al Young


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
California Digital Library (CDL) - University of California Libraries
Free Online - UC Press E-Books Collection
Mark Twain Project Online