Vityaz (Russian: Витязь, "Knight") was one of the Soviet and Russian special forces units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) within the Independent Operative Purpose Division (ODON) of the Internal Troops (VV). Its full name is 1st Special Purpose Unit of the Internal Forces "Vityaz" (1-й отряд специального назначения внутренних войск «Витязь».) It was assigned specifically to counter-terrorism duties, but was trained to deal with civil unrest, prison rebellions and mutinies of regular army units.
The name Vityaz is also used by a private security firm, using the unit's name and logo, and a private security training center, headed by the unit's former commander, Sergei Lysyuk.


== HistoryEdit ==
Vityaz was created on May 5, 1991, formed on the basis of the pre-existing 6th detachment of OSNAZ within the OMSDON division of Soviet Internal Troops. This unit was involved in a variety of operations and incidents through the 1980s, often in cooperation with the KGB's Alpha Group.
In November 1991, Vityaz was part of the Internal Troops of Russia contingent sent to restore the Kremlin's control over Grozny, but their deployment was blocked by Chechen separatists immediately after landing and it was then flown back following a standoff at Grozny Airport, without even disembarking. In 1992–1993, it was sent to the East Prigorodny conflict to fight against ethnic Ingush militias.
On October 3, 1993, during the Russian constitutional crisis, Vityaz personnel in BTR armored vehicles, indiscriminately gunned down a crowd of both anti-Yeltsin protesters (most of them unarmed) and onlookers at the Ostankino TV center in Moscow. The media reported at least 46 fatalities, including Rory Peck and three other journalists. The unit's commander, Colonel Sergei Lysyuk, was awarded Hero of the Russian Federation for his actions at Ostankino, which were credited as "saving Yeltsin's rule from the opposition".
Later, Vityaz was active in the Chechen Wars, including the federal assaults on Argun and Gudermes, and possibly during the Samashki massacre in 1995, as well as against insurgents in the greater North Caucasus. It also participated in the Kizlyar-Pervomayskoye hostage crisis in 1996 and in the Moscow theater hostage crisis in 2002.
On September 1, 2008, Vityaz and Rus were deactivated and merged into a single unit, the 604th Red Banner Special Purpose Center of the Interior Ministry, under direct command of ODON.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website (Russian)
Internet portal (Russian)