The Yamam (Hebrew: ימ"מ‎, an acronym for Special Police Unit (יחידה משטרתית מיוחדת, Yeḥida Mishtartit Meyuḥedet)) is an Israeli counter-terrorism unit, one of four special units of the Israel Border Police. The Yamam is capable of both hostage-rescue operations and offensive take-over raids against targets in civilian areas. Besides military duties, it also performs SWAT duties and undercover police work.


== HistoryEdit ==
The Yamam was established in late 1974 after the Ma'alot massacre, where a failed operation by military special forces units resulted in 21 children being murdered before the hostage takers were killed. Since hostage rescue in friendly territory is different from that in hostile areas, it was decided to establish an elite civilian force, which develops and practices a special CQB (Close Quarters Battles) doctrine for "counter-terrorism" operations in friendly territory and hostage rescue.


=== Operational record 1974 – September 2000Edit ===
Some of the missions known to the public prior to the al-Aqsa Intifada are listed below:
March 1978, a Yamam force engaged the militants who took over a bus in an event known as the "Coastal Road massacre".
In March 1988, the Yamam was called into action after a group of three Palestinians hijacked a bus full of women returning from work at the Negev Nuclear Research Center near Dimona, in an incident known as the "Mothers' Bus attack". The terrorists killed 3 passengers. The Yamam struck, killing all three hijackers.
September 8, 1992: Yamam snipers shot and killed Eithan More, who killed 4 women in a Mental Health clinic in Jerusalem.
May 3, 1994: Yamam snipers shot and killed an armed man in Uzi Meshoolam's compound after he shot at a police helicopter.
On March 3, 2000, the Yamam captured an armed group hidden in the Israeli–Arab town of Tayibe. One man was arrested and four militants were killed.


=== Operational record during the Second IntifadaEdit ===
During the Second Intifada, under the Shin Bet's command, Yamam forces intercepted many militants, either by arresting them or killing them. Several high profile militants were killed by Yamam operators. Often, when the wanted Palestinian militants were barricaded inside a building, Yamam force laid siege to it while IDF Caterpillar D9 armored bulldozers forced them out by razing the structure.
Most of the Unit's activity is classified.


=== Honors and awardsEdit ===
In October 2010, the Yamam won the "Urban Shield" SWAT competition held by the Alameda County Sheriff's Office setting a new record in the competition.
In October 2011, the Yamam won the "Urban Shield" SWAT competition held by the Alameda County Sheriff's Office for the second consecutive year.
In October 2013, the "Yamam" won the international "Urban Shield" counter-terror competition against 27 top rated police and federal SWAT teams from around the world. their point score was the highest ever in the history of the competition.


== Name and structureEdit ==
In Israel, the Yamam is also known as the "Unit for Counter-Terror Warfare" (Hebrew: היחידה ללוחמה בטרור‎). It is subordinate to the Ministry of Internal Security central command and is part of the civilian Israel Police force, specifically the Israel Border Police. Its operators and officers are professional policemen on payroll, usually with infantry experience from their military service within the Israel Defense Forces. Yamam recruits its members exclusively from Israeli units.


=== ResponsibilitiesEdit ===
The unit is primarily responsible for civilian hostage rescue within Israel's borders, but from about the mid-1990s it has also been used for tasks such as arresting police suspects who have barricaded themselves in structures and requiring specialized extraction methods, as well as in personal security for VIPs and in counter-terror operations within the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The Yamam are schooled in basic Arabic and dress to assimilate within the Arab population to avoid detection in order to carry out raids to arrest those suspected of conducting terrorist activities within Israel.
However, most of the Yamam's activity is classified, and published Yamam operations are often credited to other units.


=== OrganizationEdit ===
The Yamam has around 200 officers, and consists of a headquarters element, an intelligence section and a small team responsible for the development of new operational techniques and testing new equipment.
Aside from these central elements, the bulk of the unit is divided into a number of sections, each consisting of five teams, each containing operators with a particular specialization, so that the section includes within its numbers all the elements needed for a successful operation: roping team, entry team, medic team, sniping team, K-9 team, EOD team (demolition and bomb disposal).
Thus, whereas an IDF special forces operation needs to assemble elements from different specialist units, in Yamam, they are all permanently part of the same unit, living, training and operating together.


=== Recruitment and trainingEdit ===
Applicants for Yamam must be between 22 and 30 years old and must have completed their three-year infantry service in the IDF with a level 8 of IDF training or higher, although no previous police experience is required. Unlike American SWAT teams, the YAMAM is a professional unit with only combat duties and no other type of police work.
The selection process includes a "hell week" said to be one of the hardest in the world. This level of difficulty is achieved because all the applicants are already seasoned combat soldiers, many having served in elite special forces units during their compulsory conscription as well. The skills they are looking for in every candidate are: intelligence, physical fitness, motivation, trustworthiness, accountability, maturity, stability, judgment, decisiveness, teamwork, influence, and communication.
Training lasts six months and is carried out in the unit's own training center, although some use is made of the facilities at the IDF Counter Terror Warfare School (LOTAR, Unit 707.) The course is divided into a three-month general CT training period at the end of which recruits are selected for their specialization and then concentrate for the remaining four months on that specialization. Upon graduation, individuals are posted to fill gaps in the sections.
Yamam considers that it has several advantages over the IDF counter-terror units, first, because the men are more mature, most in their mid 30's and early 40's, and spend much longer in the unit than the equivalent military units, and, second, because the units contain a far broader range of ages and experience.
The Yamam is self-dependent, training its own operators in all fields, such as sniping, reconnaissance, dog operating, bomb disposal, etc. As a result, the Yamam has a rapid deployment time and high coordination between various squads (sniping squad, entry team, engagement force, etc.).


== EquipmentEdit ==

Glock-17 Pistol
Glock-19 Pistol
Glock-26 back-up weapon
Para Micro-Uzi
FN P90 Submachine gun
M4 carbine
Colt Commando
Remington 870 Combat Shotgun
Benelli M4
SR25 Sniper rifle
PGM Sniper rifle
Barrett MRAD Multi-role sniper rifle
Barrett M82A1 Anti-materiel rifle


== See alsoEdit ==
Israeli Special Forces:
Sayeret

Israeli security forces:
Israel Border Police
Yamas (another Border Police special forces unit)

Israeli police
Israeli Defence Forces
Shin Bet

Similar foreign counter terrorism units:
List of special response units
National Security Guard


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further readingEdit ==
YAMAM (Hebrew) - official site (Israeli Police official website)