Rapid reaction unit (Czech: Útvar rychlého nasazení - ÚRN or URNA) is a SWAT unit of the Czech Police. It is under command of the Ministry of the Interior.


== History and name ==
URNA was established in 1981 as a part of the SNB (Sbor národní bezpečnosti - National Security Corps). After Velvet Revolution in 1989 the unit was administratively allocated as a Police department with statewide scope of authority. In some cases the department serves for detention of dangerous suspects. Members are drawn from the Czech Police in a multistep selection process and are further subject to the special physical and vocational training. The department currently provides protection of diplomats in Iraq and Pakistan.


== Organization ==
Rapid response team is divided into three sections:
1. Rapid Deployment Section - consists of three intervention groups (Specialists, Pyrotechnists, Training Group)
2. Special Services Section - consists of members with specific specializations such as snipers, signalman, negotiators, drivers
3. Administrative and Logistics Section - provides organizational, material and staffing, including the secretariat, a lawyer and administrative staff


== Training ==
Members of the Czech Police with at least five years of service (or an academic degree) can join the URNA. The basis is a special-tactical training, shooting preparation, work at heights and self defense along with airborne and topographical and medical training. URNA practices with foreign forces like SAS, GSG9, GIGN, etc. Members of the unit were involved in a police mission in Kosovo. They are also members of the Special Team Six.
Required properties are as follows:
a) Intelligence - Average to above average. The ability to learn. Define and solve problems in stressful environments.
b) Ambition and self-discipline - know your own abilities, work on yourself.
c) Flexibility and adaptability - unconventional thinking, inventiveness, ability to improvise.
d) Maturity - it is intended behavior devoid of impulsiveness, naivety, exaggeration, internal discipline.
e) Psychosomatic stability - related to emotional stability. The candidate should not be subject to psychosomatic problems.
f) Emotional stability - patience, the ability to withstand criticism.
g) Emotional mood - optimism, sense of humor, without sudden fluctuations.
h) Social adaptability - friendly and open meeting, respect to authority, adopt rules of group.
i) Aggression and courage - to show targeted and controllable aggression. Courage with self-preservation, no stunt.
j) High frustration tolerance - the ability to remain operational and focused on meeting targets during break, waiting and disturbing influences.
k) Sense of justice, honesty, conscientiousness and positive motivation to work.


== Equipment ==
Glock 17 pistol
SIG Sauer pistol variants
Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine gun, in various versions/configurations.
Heckler & Koch G36 & HK416 assault rifles in various versions/configurations.
SIG-Sauer SSG 3000 sniper rifle
Benelli M3 shotgun
Nomex gloves


== References ==